[Amit Varma]: One of my bugbears about India is that if you stop someone on the street and ask for
[Amit Varma]: directions, they will give you directions.
[Amit Varma]: They may never have heard of the place you're trying to reach, but directions they will
[Amit Varma]: give.
[Amit Varma]: Go straight, turn right at the banyan tree, turn left at the barbershop, then right again
[Amit Varma]: at the podcasting studio, then straight until you hit a dead end, climb the wall in front
[Amit Varma]: of you, jump into the cesspool on the other side, and as Lord Yama comes to take your
[Amit Varma]: soul away, ask him, he will know.
[Amit Varma]: Social media is a bit like that, except that no one asks for directions, and still people
[Amit Varma]: give.
[Amit Varma]: It's imperative on social media to have an opinion on everything.
[Amit Varma]: On Monday, you're an expert in pandemics.
[Amit Varma]: On Tuesday, you're an expert in foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: On Wednesday, you will lecture a rocket scientist on how a rocket should be designed.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, the thing is, in the hard sciences, while you do have outlier cases of idiots
[Amit Varma]: lecturing Nobel Prize winners, you don't see so much gyan being given.
[Amit Varma]: But in fields like economics and foreign policy, everyone is a pandit.
[Amit Varma]: People who comment on economics make the same standard set of mistakes.
[Amit Varma]: They care about intentions instead of outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: They treat the world as a zero-sum game.
[Amit Varma]: They think with a top-down engineering mindset because that is all their peanut brains can
[Amit Varma]: comprehend.
[Amit Varma]: And in foreign policy, we make the mistake of thinking in terms of principles instead
[Amit Varma]: of interests and levers.
[Amit Varma]: For the last couple of weeks, everyone on Twitter has been a foreign policy expert.
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of glad these recent elections happened, as that diverted attention from Russia and
[Amit Varma]: Ukraine.
[Amit Varma]: One random fellow started lecturing me, and this is offline, not on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: One random fellow started lecturing me on Ukraine, and I deftly diverted him by asking
[Amit Varma]: for his opinion on vote distribution in Uttarakhand.
[Amit Varma]: So much gyan everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So much gyan.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Barma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I was in Bangalore when Russia invaded Ukraine, recording seven episodes of the show in eight
[Amit Varma]: days.
[Amit Varma]: You've already heard two of them with Ram Guha and Dhani Rajendran.
[Amit Varma]: And while I bumped into my friends Pranay Kota Sane and Nitin Pai over there, it didn't
[Amit Varma]: strike me that maybe we should chat about Russia and Ukraine.
[Amit Varma]: It was when I got back to Mumbai that I thought, hey, why not do an episode where we use the
[Amit Varma]: Russia-Ukraine conflict to illustrate basic principles of foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: Most of us, when we approach a new subject, we get confused by all the information around
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: It helps to understand it from first principles, to build a framework or a lens through which
[Amit Varma]: we can view the problem.
[Amit Varma]: My first instinct when Russia invaded Ukraine, and probably yours as well, was to condemn
[Amit Varma]: Russia and Vladimir Putin for the needless violence.
[Amit Varma]: Now the questions come up.
[Amit Varma]: How should India react?
[Amit Varma]: What caused the conflict?
[Amit Varma]: What are the dynamics in play here?
[Amit Varma]: What are Europe's pulls and pressures?
[Amit Varma]: What mistakes has the US made in this conflict?
[Amit Varma]: What will China take away from this?
[Amit Varma]: And in general, how should we look at international relations?
[Amit Varma]: I thought Pranay and Nitin would be the perfect people to talk about this.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, they've been educating people on this for over a decade.
[Amit Varma]: Nitin started the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore many, many years ago, and every
[Amit Varma]: year these guys teach courses on public policy and foreign policy to over a thousand people
[Amit Varma]: every year.
[Amit Varma]: Their faculty is incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And if you are interested in the subject for this episode, you might want to sign up for
[Amit Varma]: the May cohort of Takshashila's GCCP course in Defense and Foreign Affairs, which introduces
[Amit Varma]: students to the role of military and economic power in global affairs.
[Amit Varma]: I'll give the link for it in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: We recorded this episode remotely, and Nitin had to leave in a couple of hours, so he's
[Amit Varma]: only there for the first half.
[Amit Varma]: In this first half, we freewheel through a bunch of topics.
[Amit Varma]: And in the second half, Pranay and I dig deeper in a more systematic way.
[Amit Varma]: But don't think of this episode as an explainer.
[Amit Varma]: It works much better in provoking thought, in showing you new pathways into the subject,
[Amit Varma]: in opening up rabbit holes to you, which I hope you'll use the show notes to explore.
[Amit Varma]: I'll also link all my past episodes on foreign policy and my delightful deep dive last year
[Amit Varma]: with Pranay.
[Amit Varma]: Before we go to the conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And as is often the case, I don't even have a commercial, but chalo, let's wing it.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught over 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: and an online community has sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay and Nitin, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest 2]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest 2]: Great to be here.
[Guest 1]: Hey, Amit.
[Guest 1]: I'm really happy to be here after such a long time.
[Guest 1]: It's fantastic to see the way the podcast has taken off.
[Guest 1]: Everybody tells me wonderful things about Amit and I try to correct their imperception.
[Guest 2]: What we see and what we hear is not actually what we see.
[Guest 2]: The scene and the unseen.
[Guest 1]: The scene, the heard and the unheard.
[Amit Varma]: The heard and the unheard.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you guys, other people just know me from the podcast, which I guess is a scene,
[Amit Varma]: but you guys have met me in person and have known me for many years.
[Amit Varma]: So you know the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, Nitin, if I want to do a seven hour episode with you when I next come to
[Amit Varma]: Bangalore, so that's on the plan.
[Amit Varma]: But today, because our subject is so weighty and also you're leaving us after two hours
[Amit Varma]: and I'll continue with Pranay, we'll skip the personal stuff for now and we'll just
[Amit Varma]: get on to the situation we are in.
[Amit Varma]: And my first question is this, that, you know, there are long times in world history when
[Amit Varma]: there is a sort of equilibrium, not just in terms of the way things are, but in terms
[Amit Varma]: of the way we look at something, we look, we look at a subject, we build a certain framework
[Amit Varma]: and we think that, okay, that's our framework and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it could be in the imagination of people of a particular world order.
[Amit Varma]: This is the way the world is.
[Amit Varma]: This is a way power balances work.
[Amit Varma]: This is a way countries do the things they do and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But then there are moments where everything kind of changes, like World War Two, obviously
[Amit Varma]: just reset everything and reconfigured everything.
[Amit Varma]: And there are arguments that, you know, the attacks of 2001 also kind of did that.
[Amit Varma]: But we weren't quick enough to sufficiently appreciate it.
[Amit Varma]: And the point has been made by some that what's happening in Russia, Ukraine is either a,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a big turning point like that, or sort of a reflection of how the world changed
[Amit Varma]: in 2001 itself.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a danger and I, I'm coming to this with a reference to other fields that
[Amit Varma]: we look at the world in skeuomorphic ways, a skeuomorphic is a design term that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, that a completely new technology will still have design elements of an older technology,
[Amit Varma]: which may be redundant in the new technology, but you kind of need it because you want people
[Amit Varma]: to feel comfortable.
[Amit Varma]: Like when Apple first had, you know, their ebooks-ka thing, physically, if you went on
[Amit Varma]: the computer, there was a physical bookshelf.
[Amit Varma]: Many music editing softwares will show a knob on the screen, even though you're not actually
[Amit Varma]: physically turning a knob, just to make older people kind of comfortable.
[Amit Varma]: So just looking at kind of what's been happening, that do you feel that there might be a shift
[Amit Varma]: happening like that?
[Amit Varma]: And that traditional analysts who've kind of really understood the world as it is so far,
[Amit Varma]: might therefore, you know, miss out on things or need to watch out for it?
[Guest 1]: I mean, you know, I think our generation, when I say our generation, everybody who's
[Guest 1]: 20 years older than me and 20 years younger than me, I guess is my generation.
[Guest 1]: But we've been extremely lucky to have been living at a point in time where there was
[Guest 1]: extraordinary amount of peace, extraordinary amount of international cooperation, free
[Guest 1]: movement of people across borders, ideas, capital across borders.
[Guest 1]: And we sort of took this for granted.
[Guest 1]: And there were a lot of people like Tom Friedman, for example, who, you know, went to town about
[Guest 1]: it and saying, this is the, you know, natural state, the world has arrived at a particular
[Guest 1]: kind of setup.
[Guest 1]: And this is going to be the way it is, right?
[Guest 1]: Now, unfortunately, if you look through most of known history, there have been two kinds
[Guest 1]: of cycles.
[Guest 1]: One is a very popular version of the cycle, call it the cycle of war and peace.
[Guest 1]: So there is war, and then there is peace, there are long periods of war and long periods
[Guest 1]: of peace.
[Guest 1]: And these, you know, how long war lasts, how long peace lasts is a matter of, you know,
[Guest 1]: context, history, and so on.
[Guest 1]: But everybody has sort of understood that there are, you know, coherent times of war
[Guest 1]: and coherent times of peace.
[Guest 1]: This is a very popular and sort of instinctive understanding of human history.
[Guest 1]: But there is another dimension in which you could look at this cycle, and that is cycles
[Guest 1]: of order and disorder.
[Guest 1]: There are periods where there is order in the international system.
[Guest 1]: When we say international system, it's about, you know, across countries, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, you do have the same cycles happening within countries also, you know, countries
[Guest 1]: have periods of order and periods of disorder.
[Guest 1]: But similarly, across countries, the world itself, there are times when there is tends
[Guest 1]: to be a lot more order.
[Guest 1]: And there are times when there tends to be a lot more of disorder, right?
[Guest 1]: Now, the question is, why does this happen?
[Guest 1]: War and peace are easy to understand, you know, war happens because there is some very
[Guest 1]: peaceful person in Russia, who really is minding his own business.
[Guest 1]: And then all these terrible Westerners come there and disturb him.
[Guest 1]: And he says, Okay, I'm such a peace loving person, I'm being threatened, and now I'm
[Guest 1]: going to declare war on Ukraine.
[Guest 1]: That's one way of looking at why there might be war, war and peace are easier to understand.
[Guest 1]: But order and disorder are a little harder to understand.
[Guest 1]: Why is there order?
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: Like, for example, why is it that since 1989, to roughly about 2010, we enjoyed a period
[Guest 1]: of relative calm, relative stable rules of the game, whether it's international politics,
[Guest 1]: economics, technology, there was always some kind of, generally, you knew what the rules
[Guest 1]: of the game were.
[Guest 1]: And people generally followed those things.
[Guest 1]: Why does this order happen?
[Guest 1]: The most important determinant of order is power, and the distribution of power.
[Guest 1]: Now, if you're like the Roman Emperor, the Roman Empire or the British Empire, or in
[Guest 1]: the last century, the American Empire, if you want to call it, you would impose your
[Guest 1]: order on the international system, you had Pax Romana, you had Pax Britannica, Pax Americana.
[Guest 1]: So although it's called Pax, it's actually order, you're imposing a certain order on
[Guest 1]: the international system, because you are the most powerful guy, you're the most powerful
[Guest 1]: emperor, you're the most powerful state in that system.
[Guest 1]: And you can do whatever.
[Guest 1]: So you shape the order according to your interests.
[Guest 1]: So let's say you're a militant vegetarian empire of Amit, and the militant vegetarian
[Guest 1]: empire of Amit can design an international order, where vegetarianism prevails.
[Guest 1]: And anybody who eats meat, or any country that decides to have chicken pulao, it becomes
[Guest 1]: a rogue state and you declare war on them and so on and so forth.
[Guest 1]: So it's entirely up to you, and what kind of a person you are, if you're an emperor,
[Guest 1]: and what kind of a state you are, you know, if the core state, if you're an Ottoman Empire,
[Guest 1]: you have a certain worldview, if you're the British Empire, you have a certain worldview,
[Guest 1]: and you impose this on the rest of the world.
[Guest 1]: That's not the only way there is order.
[Guest 1]: There is another way where there is order, where it comes from the balance of power,
[Guest 1]: where you're not the only most powerful entity, there are half dozen or maybe 20 or 50 entities,
[Guest 1]: who all are powerful enough to have their way, but not so powerful enough to upset the
[Guest 1]: whole apple nut.
[Guest 1]: So you have some kind of an equilibrium, which comes from balance.
[Guest 1]: So if you now say, okay, these are the two ways there is order, and then when you see
[Guest 1]: disorder happening, then you have to question, right?
[Guest 1]: Is it that we lack powerful state, which we call a hegemon in academic parlance, right?
[Guest 1]: So is there a hegemon who's imposing order now, does that hegemon exist or not?
[Guest 1]: If there is no hegemon, maybe you'll go into disorder, or is there a lack of balance of
[Guest 1]: power, right?
[Guest 1]: In the sense that there are no, not enough number of powerful actors who can keep cancel
[Guest 1]: each other out, and therefore you have disorder.
[Guest 1]: So I think we're in that phase now where there is disorder, and we're really asking ourselves,
[Guest 1]: why is there disorder?
[Guest 1]: Why is it that Putin can walk into Ukraine?
[Guest 1]: Why is it that Xi Jinping can claim half the South China Sea as his personal fiefdom or
[Guest 1]: the China's fiefdom, you know, all sorts of actors around the world are pulling this off.
[Guest 1]: So is it because we lack a global hegemon, or is it because we lack a global balance?
[Guest 1]: And that's the big debate, I mean, you can probably argue for both cases.
[Guest 1]: But what is true is that in the absence of a stable order, powerful countries can do
[Guest 1]: whatever they want and get away with it.
[Guest 1]: This is where that famous Xi Jinping's million dialogue comes in, because when the Athenians
[Guest 1]: invaded the millions, and they wanted to put the millions to the sword, the millions said,
[Guest 1]: why are you doing to us, this to us, we are Hellenic, you are Hellenic, you are Greek,
[Guest 1]: we are Greek, why are you killing us, you shouldn't be killing us.
[Guest 1]: So the Athenians say, the strong do what they can, and the weak suffer what they must.
[Guest 1]: So in the wonderful words of ancient Indian philosophers, Jiska randa uski bhens, so that's
[Guest 1]: where we are now, Jiska randa uski bhens.
[Guest 1]: So Putin can do what he wants, and get away with it.
[Guest 1]: Because there is a sense that the order which was established doesn't exist, that equilibrium
[Guest 1]: which comes from order does not exist, does not obtain.
[Amit Varma]: And is it, you know, like you spoke about, you know, this understanding in those couple
[Amit Varma]: of decades that everything was settled, that, you know, Fukuyama was misinterpreted in the
[Amit Varma]: end of history as talking about how it's all over, and now we're settled, and that of course
[Amit Varma]: was a misinterpretation.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, his original essay, The End of History had a question mark after it, and
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of meant to be more thought provoking.
[Amit Varma]: But a couple of things strike me, one is that there is a danger when we look back at history
[Amit Varma]: that we ascribe narratives on it, and we think of it almost in a teleological way, that this
[Amit Varma]: is a story and this is how it would have proceeded, regardless of whatever, and that's easy to
[Amit Varma]: do in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, when we talk about cycles, you know, I think one that, you know, nation
[Amit Varma]: states haven't existed for that long, if you look through the long arc of history.
[Amit Varma]: So we have a very small sample size from which to draw patterns and to make conclusions about
[Amit Varma]: how the world works.
[Amit Varma]: The very fact that you talk of cycles indicates that there is a sense of inevitability, that
[Amit Varma]: at some point, this too will turn and it'll go back.
[Amit Varma]: If you're in war, it'll go back to peace.
[Amit Varma]: If you're in disorder, it'll go back to order.
[Amit Varma]: And one other kind of reasons to sort of question that, because it could equally be argued that
[Amit Varma]: any situation of order that comes about is inherently unstable, at some point it breaks
[Amit Varma]: down whether you call it a cycle or not.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, you know, question that I often ask in another context is taking off from
[Amit Varma]: Martin Luther King's quote about the long arc of history bending towards justice.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is, how the hell do you know, I mean, I appreciate the optimism, but does
[Amit Varma]: it bend towards justice?
[Amit Varma]: Or does it, you know, are we just being fanciful and kind of imposing the sort of imposing
[Amit Varma]: our hope on that?
[Amit Varma]: So similarly, you know, there seems to be an assumption when we talk of cycles that
[Amit Varma]: the long arc of geopolitics or whatever bends towards order and peace.
[Amit Varma]: Is that necessarily the case?
[Amit Varma]: Any thoughts on this?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, see, let's do Fukuyama first, and then we'll come to Martin Luther King, right?
[Guest 1]: Fukuyama was misinterpreted in many ways, right, when he talks about the end of history,
[Guest 1]: he's not talking about the end of history as in the end of the road, you know, he's
[Guest 1]: talking about end as in the purpose of history, right?
[Guest 1]: So what he's basically saying in that book, on that, that essay, which became the book,
[Guest 1]: is that liberal democracy is a condition which everybody aspires towards, right, that you
[Guest 1]: might have all sorts of things which have happened through history, but the purpose
[Guest 1]: of history, like the end of history, you know, the ultimate destination of history is liberal
[Guest 1]: democracy that people prefer, you know, people who have tasted freedom don't want to give
[Guest 1]: this up.
[Guest 1]: And since your neighbor has freedom, your other neighbor has freedom, you too want to
[Guest 1]: have freedom.
[Guest 1]: I think there is something to it, because I don't think people who are free would want
[Guest 1]: to go back to slavery.
[Guest 1]: Right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, just the self interest part of it seems to suggest that freedom is an arrow
[Guest 1]: which points in one direction, and going back in the reverse direction looks extremely hard
[Guest 1]: unless it's done using overwhelming force, right?
[Guest 1]: Willingly, I don't think people would want to go back.
[Guest 1]: Now, that's just a hypothesis, right?
[Guest 1]: I think there is something to it, but you can't conclusively prove this.
[Guest 1]: Now, what Martin Luther King says, I think is more an inspirational phrase to motivate
[Guest 1]: people into action, rather than an analytically grounded hypothesis, right?
[Guest 1]: And you don't expect leaders to be analytically grounded people, right?
[Guest 1]: I mean, Mahatma Gandhi can't say, you know, you know, let's do marginal utility of freedom
[Guest 1]: versus marginal utility.
[Guest 1]: He's not going to do, he's not going to talk in analytical terms, you know, he's going
[Guest 1]: to say, we're going to get the British out of the country.
[Guest 1]: So that's what, that's how I see Martin Luther King's statement.
[Guest 1]: I like it, because it inspires people to do the right thing.
[Guest 1]: But if you say empirically, does it hold?
[Guest 1]: I think it's a big question mark.
[Guest 1]: And I would say, going through what we've seen in history, justice itself is defined
[Guest 1]: by the hegemon.
[Guest 1]: What do you mean by justice?
[Guest 1]: Of course, arc of history bends towards justice, but what do you mean by justice?
[Guest 1]: If you look at societies where, let's say, look at China, where there is a hierarchical
[Guest 1]: system, justice is the supporting and the establishment and the perpetuation of that
[Guest 1]: hierarchy.
[Guest 1]: So, anything that goes against that hierarchy is unjust.
[Guest 1]: And that's defined by the context in which the Chinese mindset, the Chinese worldview
[Guest 1]: works.
[Guest 1]: So, of course, the arc of history will move towards that kind of justice, but doesn't
[Guest 1]: mean that you and I agree that that is actually justice.
[Guest 1]: So, I think from an international relations perspective, or even from an analytical person's
[Guest 1]: perspective, it's good to keep your slate clean and say any particular value system
[Guest 1]: is arbitrary.
[Guest 1]: And we've arrived at a particular value system because of the course of history, there's
[Guest 1]: particular paths that we took, decisions that we made, accidents that happened, choices
[Guest 1]: that were exercised, and we've arrived here.
[Guest 1]: And this is a particular value system.
[Guest 1]: And we like it because, you know, it feels better than the alternatives.
[Guest 1]: But there's nothing predetermined, or there's nothing historic, or there's nothing automatic,
[Guest 2]: or, you know, it's not a birthright.
[Guest 1]: And there might be other people who have different worldviews.
[Guest 1]: And now, if you want your worldview or your sense of right and wrong, to be established
[Guest 1]: in the world as a value system, then you have to support it with force, you have to have
[Guest 1]: the power to be able to establish.
[Guest 1]: And that's exactly what the United States is doing.
[Guest 1]: Unfortunately, you can criticize the United States for being falling short of its prospectus
[Guest 1]: and so on.
[Guest 2]: But when they say we are going to, you know, we prefer liberal democracy in the world,
[Guest 1]: that's a there is a genuine sentiment that that ought to be so.
[Guest 1]: And why?
[Guest 1]: Because it proves our point.
[Guest 1]: If you're an American, you feel that our system is the best system.
[Guest 1]: How do you prove that empirically is when you make the world like you.
[Guest 1]: That's probably what Xi Jinping is trying to do with China as well.
[Guest 1]: He has this particular world.
[Guest 1]: The Chinese have their worldview.
[Guest 1]: And to establish the truth of it, you try and use power to enforce that on everybody
[Guest 1]: else.
[Guest 1]: And so that, you know, your system is seen to be the best.
[Guest 1]: I think that's the way I would read this business of putting some level of morality in international
[Guest 1]: relations or in politics itself.
[Guest 2]: I would come from the point that everything is arbitrary.
[Guest 1]: You know, there's nothing in liberal democracy that was predestined.
[Guest 1]: There is nothing in liberal democracy that it is the state of the, it ought to be the
[Guest 1]: state of the world.
[Guest 1]: There is a course of events which happen.
[Guest 1]: They could have gone any other way.
[Guest 1]: And we might have all been today, maybe in the Chinese system where we worship the emperor
[Guest 1]: as the son of heaven, if history had gone the other way, and we would have really believed
[Guest 1]: that to be the case.
[Guest 1]: We would have believed that to be the natural order of things.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: So I may come in here, Amit, one point on the nation states thing, see nation states
[Guest 2]: themselves are new, but states are not new, right?
[Guest 2]: So this idea of power and contestation, balance of power that predates nation states, the
[Guest 2]: overlapping of the mental construct and the political construct, right?
[Guest 2]: That is nation state.
[Guest 2]: But so those, these ideas of states, power, what does it mean to be more powerful are
[Guest 2]: there even in Arthashastra, for example, right?
[Guest 2]: So we have more sort of data points, so to say, on judging whether power matters or not.
[Guest 2]: And it's not just last 200 or 300 years.
[Guest 2]: So that's just one point I wanted to make.
[Guest 2]: The other thing which Nitin mentioned about the ultimate aim of a global hegemon to also
[Guest 2]: convert the other countries to themselves, right?
[Guest 2]: Take themselves is, I think, the way I want to frame it is that the aim for a global superpower
[Guest 2]: is not just to gain maximum power, but to gain authority.
[Guest 2]: And authority is a combination of power plus legitimacy, right?
[Guest 2]: So in the sense, you make your own value so powerful that all others want to have and
[Guest 2]: aspire for that, right?
[Guest 2]: So that's what superpowers aspire to do.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's what the US situation also has been.
[Guest 2]: And coming to the first question, which both of you were discussing, I was thinking as
[Guest 2]: a question for both of you, that how much of this world disorder is because of the changing
[Guest 2]: changes in narrative that have happened over the last 15-20 years, right?
[Guest 2]: So until 1990, the overwhelming stories from the West or the US, which was the most powerful
[Guest 2]: nation state, were largely stories of hope, stories of improvement, stories where things
[Guest 2]: are getting better.
[Guest 2]: But if you see stories over the last 10 years, whether it's because of the internet or whatever,
[Guest 2]: they're the largely the stories that we see from the West as well, are negative stories
[Guest 2]: that seem to suggest that things are not well there itself, right?
[Guest 2]: So how much does that have an impact on order, disorder, how others see you, right?
[Guest 2]: If ultimately, you want others to think like you, and you are yourself thinking largely
[Guest 2]: negatively, how does that impact power and order and disorder, right?
[Guest 2]: So what do you folks think?
[Amit Varma]: I'll actually attempt a two part answer, which in a sense, by itself is a question, because
[Amit Varma]: then I'll ask for your thoughts on that.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of those is that I think that I look at, you know, it's tempting to look
[Amit Varma]: back at history and see a story and see a linear story, this happened, that happened,
[Amit Varma]: everything seems inevitable in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: But I, you know, I look back at history and just see bunch of, you know, accidental happenings
[Amit Varma]: that change the course in big ways, like one of the questions I often ask the historians
[Amit Varma]: who come on my show is about Carlisle's great man theory of history, right, where there
[Amit Varma]: is, of course, Carlisle's theory is that there are great men, and unfortunately, in the past
[Amit Varma]: all men, but you can see great people theory of history in the 21st century.
[Amit Varma]: But there are these great people and they change the course of history.
[Amit Varma]: And the counter view to that is that, that there are historical trends and events, you
[Amit Varma]: know, which are moving, which are flowing on their own and, you know, which person happens
[Amit Varma]: to kind of be on top at a particular point in time is happenstance and the trends are
[Amit Varma]: what they are, and people don't make so much of a difference.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm inclined to agree with Carlisle and think that great men in that sense, quote
[Amit Varma]: unquote, do make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Putin is a classic example, because if you, you know, if you look at his individual
[Amit Varma]: pathologies, his yearning for sort of a past greatness, you know, Neil Ferguson speaks
[Amit Varma]: about how he sees himself as a successor to Peter the Great, Marvin Kalb writes about
[Amit Varma]: how he sees himself as a successor to Catherine the Great, you know, and there are other theories
[Amit Varma]: about how for him in 91, when the Soviet Union breaks apart, it is traumatic, because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, he's a loyalist in that sense of what the Soviet Union was, and especially he can't
[Amit Varma]: bear that Belarus and Ukraine are separate because to him, Belarus, Ukraine and Russia
[Amit Varma]: are part of the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So whatever he's harking back to, he's got a different value system, he's harking back
[Amit Varma]: to stuff, he is the arch authoritarian and he, you know, and in a sense, there is no
[Amit Varma]: democracy in Russia, of course.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, was it inevitable?
[Amit Varma]: If he was not there, would somebody else like him be there?
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think that's necessarily the case, one doesn't know, like I hark back to this
[Amit Varma]: article Keshava Guha wrote in an Indian context, where he speaks about, you know, a bunch of
[Amit Varma]: deaths that happened over a five year period in the early 2000s, late 90s, where he says
[Amit Varma]: that what would the BJP look like if Pramod Mahajan hadn't died?
[Amit Varma]: Or what would, you know, the Congress have looked like if Shindiya Pilot and Prasad hadn't
[Amit Varma]: died?
[Amit Varma]: And those are interesting questions.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that happenstance really comes in the way.
[Amit Varma]: And part of, you know, part of the cause for the disorder can also be attributed to an
[Amit Varma]: unhappy series of accidents, like, what if instead of Xi Jinping, you know, there's an
[Amit Varma]: automotive, it's not necessary that everyone who took over would necessarily have had the
[Amit Varma]: same kind of view or the same idea of, you know, their destiny or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: So that is part one of my answer as a possibility.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking aloud.
[Amit Varma]: And part two is, and this is why I think that disorder may be natural to us and order may
[Amit Varma]: be harder to achieve, is partly because of the internet and social media.
[Amit Varma]: Because what the internet and social media do is that they push you into narrative battles,
[Amit Varma]: where there is a natural drive to extremes, like all of us know of the median voter theorem,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Whereas in politics, where in politics, both parties are kind of pushed towards the center,
[Amit Varma]: you know, for example, in the US, you might have the Democrats and Republicans in the
[Amit Varma]: primaries are at extreme ends, because you're appealing to true believers, but the moment
[Amit Varma]: there's a general election, they come closer together.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, it's they can't leave that space in the middle.
[Amit Varma]: But that has been upturned, I believe, by kind of social media, where there is an incentive
[Amit Varma]: to push towards the extremes, where once you're part of a tribe, the only way to stand out
[Amit Varma]: in that tribe is to be more extreme than the next guy.
[Amit Varma]: And to crucify the moderate in that tribe for not being pure enough.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm giving a simplistic example of social media.
[Amit Varma]: And this is really, you know, more Twitter than anything else.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that that's what tends to happen in these narrative battles that everyone just
[Amit Varma]: gets more and more extreme.
[Amit Varma]: And the median voter theorem as it were no longer holds.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, and of course, you one could argue that you keep getting more and more
[Amit Varma]: extreme till it's not sustainable, it falls apart.
[Amit Varma]: And then again, you go back to the old equilibrium entirely possible.
[Amit Varma]: But these are sort of my two thinking aloud thoughts on this is since you are so what
[Guest 1]: do you guys think of it?
[Guest 1]: You know, this is already shaping out to be a fantastic conversation.
[Guest 1]: There are so many directions in which I want to take this that I'm losing myself, right?
[Guest 1]: But here's one thing which you mentioned, Avneet, which I think is interesting from
[Guest 1]: an electrical engineer's point of view.
[Guest 1]: I think I, you know, first and foremost, I am an electrical engineer, not a practicing
[Guest 1]: one, but at least a pretend one.
[Guest 1]: But you know, one of the things we learn in engineering, and I think you learn that in
[Guest 2]: high school physics, is also this idea of this idea of entropy, right?
[Guest 1]: Entropy is disorder.
[Guest 1]: And what you learn from a law of thermodynamics is that entropy of the universe is increasing,
[Guest 1]: like disorder increases, right?
[Guest 1]: And if you want to create order, you need to feed energy into the system.
[Guest 1]: So you, you know, if you don't do anything, and entropy takes over and starts, you know,
[Guest 1]: things start falling apart, the center cannot hold, right?
[Guest 1]: So that's the natural order of things.
[Guest 1]: So it's, I think it's the same in human activity, in human society, that if you let
[Guest 1]: things be, things start going towards disorder, right?
[Guest 1]: Becomes disorderly.
[Guest 1]: And to impose any kind of order, you need to inject energy, which is resources, right?
[Guest 1]: So you know, putting, holding together a nation state, having a police force that manages,
[Guest 1]: you know, society or manages the traffic, requires you to inject energy into the system
[Guest 1]: and inject resources into the system.
[Guest 1]: So then the question is, who has the kind of resources, who has the incentives to be
[Guest 1]: able to inject the resources in order to keep that system together, right?
[Guest 1]: So that's how I guess, these cycles of order and disorder come about.
[Guest 1]: Because at some point, disorder exceeds a certain level, where people develop incentives
[Guest 1]: to be wanting to inject resources, energy into the system to hold things together, otherwise
[Guest 1]: things start going, you know, anarchic.
[Guest 1]: So that's also, for example, the founding myth of Indian states in Mahabharata, Shanti
[Guest 1]: Parva or in Arthashastra, right?
[Guest 1]: Where disorder at some particular yug, disorder sort of takes over.
[Guest 1]: And then these people go to Prajapati or the God and say, you know, do something for us.
[Guest 1]: And then God appoints Manu as the first man and he is given the authority, he is given
[Guest 1]: dandamiti in order to hold things together, right?
[Guest 1]: So that's sort of a philosophical idea, which comes together many stories of the formation
[Unknown]: of the state.
[Guest 1]: So I think that there is something to it, that disorder at a particular point goes against
[Guest 1]: the self-interest of most people, and then you sort of come back to it.
[Guest 1]: But the other question which Pranay asked, and what was the other questions Pranay asked,
[Guest 1]: I sort of forgot that.
[Guest 1]: We were discussing about narratives and how narratives are important.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: See, here's the thing, right, about 25-30 years ago, in political science literature,
[Guest 1]: there was this new idea called social constructivism, right?
[Guest 1]: So Alexander Wendt came up with this idea called social constructivism, which basically
[Guest 1]: says that national interest, anarchy, etc. is what the elites make of it, right?
[Guest 1]: Anarchy is what you make of it.
[Guest 1]: So even the idea called national interest, now, if you come from a classical realist
[Guest 1]: tradition, you would define national interest as a survival and the security of the state,
[Guest 1]: or like Pranay and I would say, it's about the happiness, well-being of the people, right?
[Guest 1]: So this is what we define as national interest.
[Guest 1]: What Wendt says is that this definition of national interest is constructed by the elite,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: So when I say that India's national interest is happiness, well-being, prosperity of the
[Guest 1]: people, it is a construct which we, the elite of this country, have decided is a national
[Guest 1]: interest, right?
[Guest 1]: There's nothing structural about it, there's nothing natural about it, it is a human construct.
[Guest 1]: And I think there's something to that idea that national interest is a social construct,
[Guest 1]: right?
[Guest 1]: How people act in international relations is a social construct.
[Guest 1]: This theory, which was a social science theory, I think is getting increasingly validated
[Unknown]: by biology, right?
[Guest 1]: Evolutionary biology, thanks to the work of people like Edward Wilson, and others, and
[Guest 1]: evolutionary psychology, especially, is showing that a lot of the things that we believe to
[Guest 1]: be true in social life, the things that we believe to be true, the things that we believe
[Guest 1]: to be beautiful, the things that we believe to be right, the things that we believe to
[Guest 1]: be just, are all social constructs.
[Unknown]: These are the stories that we've told ourselves, right?
[Guest 1]: Stealing is wrong, because we have told ourselves stealing is wrong, right?
[Guest 1]: In nature itself, I mean, look at the natural, I mean, look at animals, for example, I don't
[Guest 1]: think they have a concept of theft, we do.
[Guest 1]: So that's a story that we told ourselves, and of course, now cultures and genes co-evolve
[Guest 1]: and all of that.
[Guest 1]: But nevertheless, I think the story that narratives make a lot of our society, there is something
[Guest 1]: very strong, I think there is now biological evidence to that effect.
[Guest 1]: So I would agree with Pranay that in the sense that the stories that we tell ourselves, and
[Guest 1]: the stories that we tell the world about ourselves, shapes the reality that we live in.
[Guest 1]: So if we tell the world that we are a proud, liberal, democratic country, and these are
[Guest 1]: our values, these become our values, you know, and if we now go back and you know, if Putin
[Guest 1]: tells himself that he is the reincarnation of Peter the Great or Ivan the Terrible, or
[Guest 1]: Katerin somebody, and that's the sort of worldview he shapes, and because of his power, he shapes
[Guest 1]: among the elite and gets by among a significant amount of people in Russia, then that becomes
[Guest 1]: the reality that they live in.
[Guest 1]: So there is narratives definitely matter.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to double click on kind of one aspect of that where you speak about, you know, constructivism
[Amit Varma]: saying that national interest is what the elites make it out to be.
[Amit Varma]: And you also speak about, you know, evolutionary psychology playing into what those narratives
[Amit Varma]: are.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it would seem to me that therefore, India's definition of national interest would therefore
[Amit Varma]: have changed in the last few years, because earlier, when you had sort of the Nehruvian
[Amit Varma]: idea of India dominating our politics, or at least, you know, dominating elite discourse,
[Amit Varma]: it was a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you could say that there is a new elite in town, and I'm not making value judgments
[Amit Varma]: on either elites, whatever, but there's a new elite in town.
[Amit Varma]: And what the Prime Minister and his people and you know, what the whole Hindutva sort
[Amit Varma]: of philosophy which is kind of taken over our politics, that would define national interest
[Amit Varma]: differently, and that would also, for example, have elements like pride and civilization
[Amit Varma]: and traditional values and all that as playing a more important part than they would have
[Amit Varma]: in the earlier idea of India.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, things that that might have sort of upheld like greater tolerance and
[Amit Varma]: secularism and whatever, are sort of on the downswing here.
[Amit Varma]: So one, your national interest would kind of change and two, evolutionary psychology
[Amit Varma]: would also play into modern politics, because, you know, one of the fundamental insights
[Amit Varma]: of Evo Sai, which I think, speaks to, you know, the modern leaders that you see around
[Amit Varma]: the world, is that we have evolved to prefer strong leaders, because when you're kind of
[Amit Varma]: living in a tribe of 100, I mean, all our instincts, of course, evolved in prehistoric
[Amit Varma]: times, you're in a tribe of 50 people, 100 people, you got to fight the next tribe, you
[Amit Varma]: know, higher values don't really play a part, you want the leader of your tribe to be the
[Amit Varma]: strongest mofo around, right. And, and therefore, this sort of instinctive attraction, which
[Amit Varma]: so many people have for strong leaders like Putin and Modi and Orban and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth, down the line, you know, some of them are just authoritarians, and some of them
[Amit Varma]: like Modi keeps winning election after election, because he doesn't need to, you know, not
[Amit Varma]: have elections because of the appeal of that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so there is sort of a changing in the national interest. And what is perhaps
[Amit Varma]: bizarre is that then India's image of itself or how it would like to be seen by the world
[Amit Varma]: is not congruous with how strong it actually is. Because if anything, I would imagine,
[Amit Varma]: with our economy being on a downswing for a decade now, you know, we have even lost
[Amit Varma]: some of the levers that we might have had over there. And that kind of puts us in a
[Amit Varma]: pretty sort of pathetic situation. So I've rambled a bit, but since you mentioned, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how national interest can be defined by the elites, and so on, this thought just
[Guest 1]: struck me.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I'll just say some things and bring Pranay who knows about these things better
[Guest 1]: than I do to come in. Now, I think the thing about insights from evolutionary psychology
[Guest 1]: is that the most interesting insight is that things are mutable, like in the sense that
[Guest 1]: humans might have had a preference for strong leaders in the past because of the evolutionary
[Guest 1]: paths that we took. But this does not mean that it has to be the same in the future,
[Guest 1]: right? So that's the most interesting insight from evolutionary psychology, the mutability
[Guest 1]: of so, you know, determinism in terms of that is not really true. You can, you can change
[Guest 1]: things back to this idea of defining the national interest. You know, in a country of 100 people,
[Guest 1]: it's a let's say, it's a liberal democracy or some amount of freedom, or even if there's
[Guest 1]: no freedom, each of the 100 can define the interest of the collective in his or her own
[Unknown]: way, right? It's not that they all have to agree. So in a country like India, which has,
[Guest 1]: you know, so much of diversity in terms of ethnicity, language, historic evolution, and
[Guest 1]: so on, what is the common idea of a national interest, right? So you could all go in different
[Guest 1]: directions and say, hey, this is our national interest, which is, and I think that's a great
[Guest 1]: idea. I mean, we should all be able to go our own way and say, this is our national
[Guest 1]: interest. Now, what happens is in such situations that there is some kind of an anchoring effect
[Guest 1]: which the constitution gives you, because the constitution is the most accepted, you
[Guest 1]: know, most least common dissenting denominator in terms of the most accepted set of rules
[Guest 1]: and you know, norms in which we want to organize our society. So if you look at our constitution
[Guest 1]: from the preamble, just look at the preamble, it tells you what the national interest is.
[Guest 1]: You know, you're talking about, you know, justice, liberty, equality, fraternity of
[Guest 1]: various ways. And it's basically saying that individual freedom, liberty, and India as
[Guest 1]: a united political structure are the national interest, right? And now I think you need
[Guest 1]: to be extremely radical to want to differ from this and depart from this and say, no,
[Guest 1]: no, no, this is, no, we don't want liberty or we don't want national unity or any such.
[Guest 1]: So I think that the constitution of India gives us a starting point and an anchoring
[Guest 1]: point for conversations and debates on what the national interest is or ought to be. And
[Guest 1]: I use the word ought to be because it should be in the power of every individual and every
[Guest 1]: generation to interpret the national interest according to the times. It can't be that,
[Guest 1]: you know, Ambedkar and his colleagues wonderfully put this document in 1950 and we are all supposed
[Guest 1]: to follow it as if it's, you know, it's hard-coded in our times. So in this, there are commonalities
[Guest 1]: between, let's say, what the Nehruvian liberal secularism sees it and the Hindutva idea of
[Guest 1]: a nation-state sees it. There are commonalities. Like, what are the commonalities? The commonalities
[Guest 1]: is of unity of the nation, that you see India as a political unit, right? Which includes
[Guest 1]: as much of the subcontinent as possible. Now, even in the early days, people thought they
[Unknown]: could reverse partition, right? I think that would have been a terrible idea. But, you
[Guest 1]: know, even the early days, the Nehruvians thought that they could reverse partition
[Guest 1]: and, you know, in 10, 15, 20 years, we'll be back into the old and undivided India in
[Guest 1]: any way, right? Which is also the vision of an Akhand Bharat, which sees itself as occupying
[Guest 1]: territory, which is historically its own, right? Of course, we'll accept compromises
[Guest 1]: because of power and reality and so on. But you imagine that this big territorial state
[Guest 1]: is ours, right? And that is the political unit. The second thing, both the Nehruvians
[Guest 1]: and the Hindutva guys would agree on is that this state has to be powerful, right? It needs
[Guest 1]: to have power in order to defend itself from external adversaries, especially from imperialism.
[Guest 1]: And it should have enough power as a matter of in practice, such that the foreign policy
[Guest 1]: or the policy choices of your country are determined by yourself, right? So, you're
[Guest 1]: not economically weak, such that the powerful can dictate things to you. You're not militarily
[Guest 1]: weak, so that, you know, you can be kicked around, right? And you don't have, let's say,
[Guest 1]: even structurally in the system weak, where you don't have seats in the most important
[Guest 1]: places, which allow you to make rules. So, everybody agrees on this. The difference comes
[Guest 1]: in the definition of what this political unity means internally, right? So, the Indian nation,
[Guest 1]: which I would subscribe to is the Indian nation exists. It includes people of the subcontinent,
[Guest 1]: which is a Hindu, you know, largely Hindu-influenced society. There's no denying the fact. In fact,
[Guest 1]: the whole debate on who's a Hindu is, in a way, now it's politically so fraught. But
[Guest 1]: technically, it's a matter of saying, everybody thought that the people who live in the subcontinent
[Guest 1]: are Hindus, right? People are, you know, Indus and the Hindu. So, of course, now you have
[Guest 1]: a denominational definition to the word Hindu, which means that, you know, you've created
[Guest 1]: a ring fence around it and say, this is a Hindu and this is not a Hindu. And therefore,
[Guest 1]: it has a different meaning. But broadly speaking, that definition of Hinduness could include
[Guest 1]: people from all religious faiths, ethnic groups, traditions, ways of life, and so on. So, that
[Guest 1]: is one definition of Indian nationhood. Then there is a more exclusive definition of Hindu
[Guest 1]: nationhood, which comes from, which, let's say, the Hindutva, modern interpretation of
[Guest 1]: Hindutva goes in for, right? Not the original conceptualization of Hindutva. I mean, a lot
[Guest 1]: of people who read Savarkar might today, the Hindutva guys who read Savarkar today might
[Guest 1]: be shocked to find that Savarkar sounds a lot like a modernist and a liberal whom they
[Guest 1]: criticize than what they expected to be, right? So, there is a very strong sectarian version
[Guest 1]: of nationhood. And then there is a broad, you know, Catholic, liberal way of looking
[Guest 1]: at what nationhood is. And these would be the differences. But there's an overlap, right?
[Guest 1]: Because the overlap is that you believe that there are people here who are connected in
[Guest 1]: some way, right? It's not only language because people speak different languages. It's not
[Guest 1]: only religion, because even if you accept the sectarian view of Hinduism, there are
[Guest 1]: so many sects there who don't necessarily agree that, you know, the sectarian definition
[Guest 1]: of Hinduism also is pretty weak, right? Then it's not color of skin, it's not geography,
[Guest 1]: it's not historical path, it's not even, you know, your genetic makeup. But there's still
[Guest 2]: something which connects us all together, right? Whether you're a sectarian Hindu, or
[Guest 1]: whether you believe that Indianness is a non-sectarian idea, there is still a belief that these are
[Guest 1]: connected, right? So, this sense of nationhood, I think, connects both the Nehruvian liberal
[Guest 1]: definition of the state or the nation state and the Hindutva definition of, modern Hindutva
[Guest 1]: definition of the nation state. Of course, the divergence is then, what do you do with
[Guest 1]: people who are not like us, right? It's easier in the liberal, constitutional liberal setup
[Guest 1]: because even, for example, one of the first few decisions of the Supreme Court of India
[Guest 2]: is that when they define a person, it's not necessarily a citizen. So, a person in India
[Unknown]: has the same rights as a citizen. Right to freedom, right to liberty, etc. A person doesn't
[Guest 1]: have to be an Indian national, right? It could be a refugee, it could be a visitor, it could
[Guest 1]: be a traveler, it could be a guest. Maybe it could even be an intruder who intruded
[Guest 1]: into our territory. He's entitled to the fundamental rights which are there in the constitution.
[Guest 1]: So, it's easier in that framework to answer the question, what about people who are not
[Guest 1]: like us? But in a sectarian Hindu definition of it, it's not easy to define that thing.
[Guest 1]: What about people who are not like us? What do we do with them? Do they deserve to be
[Guest 1]: here? Do they have a right to be here? If we do not accept the fact that they have a
[Guest 1]: right, then what do we do with them? Right? How do we relate ourselves? It creates a whole
[Guest 1]: can of worms, which I don't think anyone has thought through. So, you have very simplistic
[Guest 1]: ideas that, you know, go to Pakistan or go to Sri Lanka, whatever they tell you. So,
[Guest 1]: they've not thought this through. And I don't think there are easy answers there.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll, you know, before Pranay comes in, I just want to kind of, I don't know the word
[Amit Varma]: for it is pushback. But I want to react to a couple of the things you said where I am
[Amit Varma]: not in complete agreement with the phrasing of them. And finally, I'll end by agreeing
[Amit Varma]: with you because one should end on a nice note. But, you know, as far as when you talk
[Amit Varma]: about the two different kinds of Hindutva, you know, and you talk about the more benign
[Amit Varma]: one is simply saying everyone is a Hindu. I mean, I have a deep problem with that phrase
[Amit Varma]: because I think it's a phrase that's convenient for elites like us to say, but will the Muslims
[Amit Varma]: of India really say that? I think the phrase, therefore, seems fundamentally exclusionary.
[Amit Varma]: And when you point to, you know, Hindutva as it once was and Savarkar and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think many Hindutva warriors of today would be aghast to find that Savarkar was
[Amit Varma]: an atheist and so on and so forth. But the point is that the fundamental point of Savarkar's
[Amit Varma]: odious book Hindutva was the fact that he said Muslims don't belong in India. That point
[Amit Varma]: that if you to qualify as a true Indian, both your place of birth and your place of worship
[Amit Varma]: has to be in India. And because Muslims worship and look to Mecca, according to him, to this
[Amit Varma]: thing, they cannot ever be called Indian. So that's a fundamentally exclusionary view.
[Amit Varma]: And that also brings me to my other point of disagreement where you speak about how
[Amit Varma]: the anchoring effect of the constitution, which is fascinating, but I think that anchoring
[Amit Varma]: effect is really in a sense for the elites. Like, I think, you know, one of the themes
[Amit Varma]: I keep harking back on during the show is that the constitution was always out of sync
[Amit Varma]: with the way society was, you know, and that became and it kind of became meaning meaningless
[Amit Varma]: once it became more of a periodical than a book as a famous cartoon once put it. And
[Amit Varma]: Ambedkar himself said in the mid 50s that, you know, he'd like to burn the constitution
[Amit Varma]: now if he can because it had lost all meaning. So nor was it as liberal as some of us would
[Amit Varma]: have liked, but it was way more liberal than society itself. And society has in a sense
[Amit Varma]: today caught up with politics. And to me, you know, in the larger mass of people, it's
[Amit Varma]: not the constitution that matters as much as, you know, this deeper civilizational narrative,
[Amit Varma]: which as Akshay Mukul's book in the Gita Press shows, has been ever present and running through
[Amit Varma]: Indian society and so on and so forth. In fact, even I did an episode with the excellent
[Amit Varma]: data journalist Rukmini S. recently, and that talks about how, you know, contrary to what
[Amit Varma]: you might expect, the young in India are deeply illiberal according to the data, right? So
[Amit Varma]: it is not as if older people are more conservative, and the young are all liberal and tolerant
[Amit Varma]: and all that, if anything, it's the opposite. And that was, you know, one of the big TILs
[Amit Varma]: of her excellent book for me. But leaving that aside, I mean, these are not connected
[Amit Varma]: to foreign policy. What I do agree with is that, you know, our genes are, we are hardwired
[Amit Varma]: to go in different directions, and often contradictory directions, we might prefer strongmen leaders,
[Amit Varma]: but we also want peace and prosperity and all of that. And to me, in fact, the great
[Amit Varma]: battle of civilization, especially since the Enlightenment, is to mitigate the sort of
[Amit Varma]: the negative impulses that we might have been hardwired with to mitigate them with culture,
[Amit Varma]: in which I think we have been largely successful, but that battle is, of course, never won,
[Amit Varma]: because you know, our hardwiring can be so strong. So, sorry, I thought I should kind
[Amit Varma]: of make these sort of points. Would you like to say anything to them or Pranay, you have
[Guest 1]: anything?
[Guest 1]: Let me just quickly respond to the two of them. I think it is entirely possible to use
[Guest 1]: the word Hindu, and without necessarily becoming exclusionary or sectarian about it. Gandhi
[Guest 1]: did it, and Gandhi proved that it could be done. Of course, people like Jinnah and others
[Guest 1]: were extremely worried about the religiosity of it, and the populist nature of that metaphor
[Guest 1]: which Gandhi used. But I don't think anybody would go and question Gandhi's religiosity,
[Guest 1]: piety. I mean, I find it way too religious, way too pious, for my taste. But nobody can
[Guest 1]: question his religiosity and piety, within the metaphors of Hinduism. And you could construct
[Guest 1]: this very wonderfully without necessarily being threatening or antagonistic to anybody
[Guest 1]: else. I mean, at the margins, yes, you would have problems with, you know, do you eat this
[Guest 1]: kind of food or not? Do you sit with me or not? Fine. I mean, you can work those things
[Guest 1]: out. They are not showstoppers. So, I don't think, and I think Shashi Tharoor has been
[Guest 1]: doing quite a good job in trying to bring that idea of Hinduness into our national discourse.
[Guest 1]: It is entirely possible to be a Hindu and not be sectarian. It is entirely possible
[Guest 1]: to be a Hindu, do your Hindu stuff, and not be a bigot, and without being hating anybody.
[Guest 1]: I don't think, you know, you have a wonderful history where hate probably is an exception
[Guest 1]: than the rule, right? Now, the other thing about elite is, I think we should accept the
[Guest 1]: fact that statecraft is an elite enterprise. The Constitution was an elite enterprise and
[Guest 1]: thank goodness it was an elite enterprise. Because if it had reflected the popular norms
[Guest 1]: and social norms of the day, you know, you wouldn't have had universal suffrage, you
[Guest 1]: wouldn't have been able to ban untouchability at the drop of a hat, you wouldn't even have
[Guest 1]: been able to do something called social justice, however imperfectly that we're talking about.
[Guest 1]: Because the very idea of social justice is an elite enterprise. I don't think there was
[Guest 1]: any, you know, popular sort of a move to say that you need to have something called, you
[Guest 1]: know, social revolution, social justice, etc. So it's fine. I think elite enterprises are
[Guest 1]: fine as long as they are very conscious of the fact that the elite don't get to make
[Guest 1]: norms which are self, you know, which suit themselves and not the others. The wonderful
[Guest 1]: thing about our Constituent Assembly is the fact that every single person there was a
[Guest 1]: person, member of the elite of that period. And every single person was extremely conscious
[Guest 1]: of the fact that as a member of the elite, he has, he or she has all the more responsibility
[Guest 1]: towards the people who are not in the room, and then the masses, right? And whichever
[Guest 1]: persuasion they came from, you know, and that was a common thread. Brandon Austin makes
[Guest 1]: that point very nicely in his book. And we don't sort of realize that. And I don't think
[Guest 1]: elite is a bad word. You know, it's very easy to say, Amit, shut up, you're an elite. Or
[Guest 1]: Pranay, you shut up, you're an elite. I mean, how does that even make sense? A person who
[Guest 1]: is elite should be quiet. Like your vote doesn't count, your voice doesn't count. Or if you're
[Guest 1]: an elite, let's say, who was studying economics, right? And tells you that, you know, in order
[Guest 1]: to control inflation, you should do A, B and C. You tell that person to shut up, you know,
[Guest 1]: you have a PhD in economics, you're so elite, so shut up. Let's 100 of us who don't understand
[Guest 1]: anything about economics, we'll make policy now. It makes no sense. I mean, it's a it's
[Guest 1]: a popular thing to point at somebody and say, this is an elite person, armchair liberal,
[Guest 1]: this, that and the other, without understanding the fact that you judge the elite, as you
[Guest 1]: judge anyone else by his or her actions, and the consequences of those actions, not by
[Guest 1]: the fact that the person has a particular identity.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, just to on this point, because it's very interesting. So elite project in the
[Guest 2]: making is different from elite project in practice, you know, so if you look at the
[Guest 2]: constitution project itself, in the making, it could be an elite project. But if you look
[Guest 2]: at books like Rohit Des, people's constitution, etc, there is a lot of evidence also that
[Guest 2]: there were people, ordinary people who use the new language that the constitution provided
[Guest 2]: about fundamental rights, property rights, etc, and questioned authorities there, right.
[Guest 2]: So it was also a project which was used by the common people to question authority over
[Guest 2]: the years, right. So that has stood. And second on that periodical versus thing, I think it's
[Guest 2]: a feature, not a bug in the sense that, yeah, even Ambedkar accepted it that you don't need
[Guest 2]: what we have decided to be the norm 100 years from now, right. So it's fine if it changes,
[Guest 2]: as long as we are and by and large, the constitution score has stood, right. So you can question
[Guest 2]: that, you know, there are a lot of things which are now being executed probably against
[Guest 2]: it, but the core of the constitution still stands. So I think that's not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: a problem.
[Amit Varma]: I should just kind of add before we move on that my point is not about the desirability
[Amit Varma]: of the constitution, I find a liberal constitution to be incredibly desirable, even though I
[Amit Varma]: think we haven't quite got it. I mean, the constitution for all practical purposes doesn't
[Amit Varma]: actually protect free speech and so on. What I was instead doing was that I was lamenting
[Amit Varma]: that the values that our liberal elites wanted to push in a top down way through the constitution,
[Amit Varma]: which was laudable in terms of intention, didn't actually go through. We are not a liberal
[Amit Varma]: society today. So it was more of a lament than anything else. I don't have options for
[Amit Varma]: what the founders could have done differently. And certainly it's easy to speak from hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, you know, in their circumstances, who knows, you know, I was actually thinking
[Amit Varma]: of a different order, as it were a different order for this episode, and we have lapsed
[Amit Varma]: into disorder, but even disorder is a good thing and beautiful things can emerge from
[Amit Varma]: entropy. So let's put some energy into that, as Nitin might say. And let's go to one of
[Amit Varma]: the subjects that I actually kept for later, but which I find really interesting is India's
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy impulses. And Nitin, you were pointing out one how some of our foreign policy
[Amit Varma]: impulses kind of emerged from the constitution itself. What I'd like from you is kind of
[Amit Varma]: a brief potted journey of how our foreign policy has evolved in terms of priorities
[Amit Varma]: and how we look at it, quick potted journey through the decades as it were. And also with
[Amit Varma]: you know, before that, perhaps an additional question that what strikes me when we look
[Amit Varma]: at foreign policy is that it is a one element of our governance that does not really depend
[Amit Varma]: upon the party in power. My impression is that our foreign policy establishment is what
[Amit Varma]: it is, and it will function across, you know, different governments and different parties
[Amit Varma]: in power, and it will do what it will do. So I find it, you know, sometimes a little
[Amit Varma]: short sighted that we'll do something on the international stage and people will say Modi
[Amit Varma]: this or Modi that or whatever, when really, from my limited point of view, our foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy has been fairly realist and fairly sort of going along the same tracks for a
[Amit Varma]: long time. So what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest 1]: Yeah, you know, I think we've got to start with 1947 as a breakpoint in foreign policy,
[Guest 1]: right? What do you have in 1947? You have a country emerging out of massive communal
[Guest 1]: riots, which has come out of Second World War, not on really good terms with the United
[Guest 1]: States and Britain because of the choices which the freedom movement made, right, to
[Guest 1]: not back them during the Second World War. So the both Americans and the British, although
[Guest 1]: they are fond of you for being a democracy, they have misgivings about you, because you
[Guest 1]: really didn't help them out in the most biggest, you know, biggest war that they ever fought.
[Guest 1]: You're a dirt poor country, you have massive amount of social challenges in your society.
[Guest 1]: It's not very clear whether you will be able to sustain yourself as a democracy or not,
[Guest 1]: right? And then you're thrown into this world where there's the United Nations and you know,
[Guest 1]: the Cold War starts and big powers are fighting nuclear, you know, there's a nuclear face
[Guest 1]: off between the big powers. Then what do you do? Right? And I think the most interesting
[Guest 1]: part of that era is Nehru's decision to be non-aligned, right? Well, he was very sympathetic
[Guest 1]: to the West. There was no doubt that he was sympathetic to the West in terms of some ways.
[Guest 1]: He didn't like the Americans, maybe had a upper British, upper class British dislike
[Guest 1]: for the Americans. He was fond of some of the experiments which the Soviets had done
[Guest 1]: because he found that, you know, big industry, etc. modernization, industrialization, modernization,
[Guest 1]: which the Soviets managed to do very quickly. He was very impressed by that. But he was
[Guest 1]: still very, you know, if you were to place him, he was on the West side, or ideologically
[Guest 1]: he was on the West side as a liberal. But India lacked power, because India lacked resources.
[Guest 1]: We didn't have, we didn't have an army of any kind. We didn't have, I mean, we had a
[Guest 1]: big army, but it was not a powerful army. It was a post-colonial army. We had a massive
[Guest 1]: challenges fighting wars with the Pakistanis. We needed support of the United Nations. Per
[Guest 1]: capita income was, I don't know, I can't even, I don't even dare to imagine what it is, what
[Guest 1]: it was at that time. What do you do if you want to have power in the international system?
[Guest 1]: Nehru tunes up the moral dimension of it, starts talking about, you know, world civilization.
[Guest 1]: He really believed it. That's another story. So we were lucky to have a guy who believed
[Guest 1]: that stuff, which he was dishing out to the others. And he talks about, you know, United
[Guest 1]: Nations, world peace, non-alignment, and so on and so forth. And that moral arguments
[Guest 1]: that he made as a leader of a post-colonial society, which won independence through non-violent
[Guest 1]: struggle, he flexed it to the maximum. So India got disproportionate amount of leverage
[Guest 1]: in international relations in the 50s, because of this moral dimension. But towards the end
[Guest 1]: of the 50s, it became clear that these guys talk a lot, they make moral judgments, but
[Guest 1]: they don't actually back this up with tangible policy. The Soviets invade Hungary, and India
[Guest 1]: just sort of says, ha ha, okay, what do we do? We are non-aligned, you know, instead
[Guest 1]: of taking a forceful position in terms of liberty and so on, right. So you're afraid
[Guest 1]: to criticize, but your moralism starts falling apart when you're afraid to criticize, or
[Guest 1]: you know, speak up when you need to speak up. But by the time Nehru leaves the scene,
[Guest 1]: non-alignment becomes more of a dogma, which is worshipped in the corridors of power in
[Guest 2]: New Delhi. So the thing about India is that sooner or later, you might, you know, put
[Guest 1]: something on a pedestal, you start worshipping it, whether it's people or ideas. And everybody
[Guest 1]: started worshipping on the order of non-alignment. And you became part of the non-alignment movement.
[Guest 1]: And I don't know what they did, right. So non-alignment died in 1971, when India signed
[Guest 1]: the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union on August 8, 1971, right,
[Guest 1]: before the war. So officially, formally, it was dead. You signed a treaty with one of
[Guest 1]: the sides, right, which of course entitled you to some benefits in the United Nations
[Guest 1]: ahead of the war. And from that period onwards, you were in this, literally in the Soviet
[Guest 1]: camp. No wonder the Americans saw you that way. Nixon, especially was a, you know, Nixon
[Guest 1]: Kissinger was extremely bipolar in their thinking. And you ended up being on the other side of
[Guest 1]: the West, right. And then you did the nuclear explosions, sanctions on you and so on. Up
[Guest 1]: to somewhere around Rajiv Gandhi in the mid 80s, you try and make an overture towards
[Guest 1]: the West, right. It's, it's a beginning of a sort of a new age. And then the Berlin Wall
[Guest 1]: falls, Soviet Union disintegrates, and you're out of the streets. You know, your superpower
[Guest 1]: sugar daddy or your superpower protector, the one who gave you clout in the UN is gone.
[Guest 1]: And what do you do now, right? So mercifully, there was economic liberalization. At the
[Guest 1]: same time, an attempt to reach out to the East Asian guys, as well as an attempt to
[Guest 1]: reach out to the to the US. But that, you know, that was still a lot of work in progress
[Guest 1]: up to the nuclear explosions in 1998. When there was a sort of a step function change,
[Guest 1]: right, the immediate short term consequences were negative, because sanctions came on you,
[Guest 1]: etc. But it was part of a overall change in the world where, you know, the US didn't see
[Guest 1]: you as they saw you in the 70s and the 60s. There was no Soviet Union, the Chinese were
[Guest 1]: growing and there were elements in the US even at that time saw India as a counterweight
[Guest 1]: to China. So, the big period of India being part of this globalized mainstream starts
[Guest 1]: somewhere in the early 2000s, right, the Justin Spalberg talks, Wanchpeki and Justin Chin
[Guest 1]: have a lot to do with this, right? They built India's relationship with the US and Manmohan
[Guest 1]: Singh and company actually solidified. So, there was continuity there. That period continues
[Guest 1]: more or less to this day, largely because India's economic growth per capita income
[Guest 1]: of about $1,800 puts you in a category where you are a significant player, which the West
[Guest 1]: cannot ignore, right? Especially when a West which sees itself in confrontation with China
[Guest 1]: cannot ignore. So, you are now in a position where you are sort of a middle power with
[Guest 1]: great usefulness to the West. And you also see your interest with the West, in both in
[Guest 1]: terms of values, in terms of business. I mean, here in Bangalore, the entire industry depends
[Guest 1]: on our relations with the West, right? 8% of India's GDP, right? That's the IT industry,
[Guest 1]: 8% of India's GDP really, and this is the 8% that is growing, this is the 8% of the
[Guest 1]: future depends on good relations with the West. So, our relations with the West have
[Guest 1]: solidified in the last 25 years. We do have this mantra of strategic autonomy, which sometimes
[Guest 1]: confuses me, because what do you need strategic autonomy for? If you ask people who talk about
[Guest 1]: strategic autonomy, you ask, what is strategic autonomy? Oh, strategic autonomy is the ability
[Guest 1]: to make our own decisions in foreign policy. Fine. Why do you need strategic autonomy?
[Guest 1]: Oh, because we can have strategic autonomy. So, strategic autonomy is both the beats and
[Guest 1]: the end, right? We need strategic autonomy because we are going to use it to get strategic
[Guest 1]: autonomy. In a way, that argument is circular, but it's popular because I think there's still
[Guest 1]: a lot of people in the country who are unwilling for various reasons to say that, look, we
[Guest 1]: have a lot in common in the West, our values and interests are increasingly converging
[Guest 1]: with the West. So, there's still that sort of resistance to accepting that for various
[Guest 1]: reasons. I mean, if your trade is with them, your values are with them, your second cousin
[Guest 1]: and your first cousin and your brother are living in the United States, you know, there's
[Guest 1]: so much of limited, there's so much of travel, movies, songs, in every sense of the word,
[Guest 1]: we are part of the overall Western sphere, right? But we don't accept it. So, that's
[Guest 1]: where we are. So, we're in a situation where we are now, you know, it's almost like, thanks
[Guest 1]: to Putin, we're at this point where, you know, it's crunch time. Are you going to continue
[Guest 1]: to say that I have strategic autonomy, I want to be this, I want to be that? Or do you want
[Guest 1]: to take sides in a way that isn't consistent with your interests? And there are many question
[Guest 1]: marks there. There are pros and cons of various positions. But nevertheless, this is a crunch
[Guest 1]: time. It is like 1989 and the Berlin Wall falling down, right? You have two, you have
[Guest 1]: very big questions in front of you, and you have to make choices.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a question for Pranay on strategic autonomy, because it seems to me that we can
[Amit Varma]: kind of get to strategic autonomy in two ways. One is that we are powerful enough that no
[Amit Varma]: one is really messing with us. It's not in anyone's interest to do so. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: we can afford to be, you know, to have strategic autonomy. The other is we are so freaking
[Amit Varma]: helpless that any choice is a bad choice and pushes us into a corner. So, we don't make
[Amit Varma]: a choice at all. And we call it strategic autonomy. And in one of your recent newsletters,
[Amit Varma]: you wrote, quote, India would come under significant pressure from both the US and Russia to show
[Amit Varma]: support for either side. Given its military over-dependence on Russia, on one hand, and
[Amit Varma]: the overwhelming agreement with the West on countering China on the other, India's choices
[Amit Varma]: have become more constrained. It will be a serious test of India's diplomacy to keep
[Amit Varma]: both sides happy. It seems to be pushed to strategic autonomy by compulsion, not by choice.
[Amit Varma]: So can you, you know, sort of elaborate on this a little bit? Like, therefore, it seems
[Amit Varma]: that we are putting the veneer of high principle and saying strategic autonomy as you know,
[Amit Varma]: a principled position that we are taking, but we don't actually have a choice, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and principles don't matter anyway in this game.
[Guest 2]: Absolutely, Amit. Agree there. So the way we think of it is that, you know, when people
[Guest 2]: use strategic autonomy currently, they are actually using it in a very tactical sense.
[Guest 2]: So there's nothing strategic about it. The current way of saying strategic autonomy is
[Guest 2]: that you can't be on either side, you probably have to make distance, keep equidistant from
[Guest 2]: both sides, etc. and all that, right? That is not strategic autonomy, right? That is
[Guest 2]: about tactically, do you want to say, on this issue, you will go with one side or the other,
[Guest 2]: whatever, right? But what is your strategic aim? The ultimate aim of strategic autonomy
[Guest 2]: would be that you should, you will gain that only when you have enough strength. And once
[Guest 2]: you have enough strength, then you can take the decision that you want, right? That would
[Guest 2]: be strategic autonomy, in my mind. So currently, I think we are still we made it a virtue like
[Guest 2]: Nitin was mentioning, first, there was a virtue about non-alignment. And I think non-alignment's
[Guest 2]: new format is strategic autonomy, which is used in a very tactical sense, to mean that
[Guest 2]: just don't work with any of the sides and we will decide on our own. And like I was
[Guest 2]: saying, it is a function of our power, right? The lesser the power you have, you can't actually
[Guest 2]: be strategically autonomous, you will have to just take decisions based on the exigencies
[Guest 2]: that other countries and the world determines for you. So that's where my view was. In what
[Guest 2]: I say, I've been trying to make a list of terms which should fall into disuse. And one
[Guest 2]: of them is strategic autonomy.
[Guest 1]: See, I think the idea of strategic autonomy is interesting. Because see, what does strategic
[Guest 1]: autonomy mean to me? I would like to have strategic autonomy. What does it mean to me?
[Guest 1]: I should be able to tell Putin that look, you invaded the country and that's wrong.
[Guest 1]: That shows that I have strategic autonomy. But if you say that I can't say that, so that
[Guest 1]: I can enjoy strategic autonomy, sort of misses the cart and the horse, right? I mean, what's
[Guest 1]: more important? I mean, you are willing to not do something in order to have something
[Guest 1]: which you don't have. I can't express the logic of it, but the logic of it has a big
[Guest 2]: flaw in it.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, and that too, something as small as taking a stance on whether this is an invasion
[Guest 2]: or not in the UN, you know, like, there is no concrete thing that can happen because
[Guest 2]: Russia is on a veto anyways. So there are things in which India can say that this is
[Guest 2]: an invasion. And yet, you know, you can move ahead on other things. But just to say that
[Guest 2]: we can't do that, in order to say that we are proving ourselves to be strategically
[Guest 2]: autonomous is perhaps not the right way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And I also want to sort of ask a larger question about, you know, the role of rhetoric and
[Amit Varma]: this whole people keep bringing up principles and we stand for this and we stand for that.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned Nehru did a lot of that, though he was a true believer in his principles.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, at least that is there. And I'm reminded of this bit that I'll quote from
[Amit Varma]: your newsletter, Pranay, but not written by you, but by a brilliant co-writer, RLJ, where
[Amit Varma]: first he writes, quote, there's so much talk about higher order morals and international
[Amit Varma]: relations that you can easily be taken in by it. Well, my view is that most of that
[Amit Varma]: stuff is garbage. The naked truth about international relations is grotesque. It needs a garb of
[Amit Varma]: pious intentions. And this becomes clear as daylight when you have a war. As much as it
[Amit Varma]: is a humanitarian crisis that saddens you, war is also a moment when all pretenses fall
[Amit Varma]: away and you see the truth, stop quote. And then right at the end of that piece, he says,
[Amit Varma]: quote, what's happening in Ukraine is a crystallization of the truths that were evident to all post
[Amit Varma]: 9-11, but difficult to prove. That truth is in front of us. You can talk forever about
[Amit Varma]: common interests and shared values. It means zilch, stop quote. So, you know, is that something
[Amit Varma]: that you'd like to kind of double click on or respond to?
[Guest 2]: The way I would put it is that there is value to the rhetoric in international relations,
[Guest 2]: you know, so there is still narratives matter, as we were discussing earlier, the rhetoric
[Guest 2]: that you use has any real can have a real life implication on how the world functions,
[Guest 2]: right. And that's why I was saying that the last 10 years, the rhetoric that has come
[Guest 2]: out is largely one which thinks of the world in being disordered things allows some states
[Guest 2]: to get away with things that they want to. So there is a purpose for rhetoric in international
[Guest 2]: relations. So I would probably disagree with that statement, that there is some function
[Guest 2]: to it. That's why I was saying that, you know, authority is what great powers aspire for.
[Guest 2]: And one part of that authority is pretending to be legitimate, legitimate, right? It can
[Guest 2]: be a pretense that you put on, but there is an importance to that pretense. That's what
[Guest 2]: I was getting.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, see, I think there's no where the RSJ quote, I mean, that's classic realism. Well,
[Guest 1]: what really matters at the end of the day is how much power do you have? And as Athenian
[Guest 1]: said, you know, the strong do what they can and the weak suffer what they must. But, you
[Guest 1]: know, you could do a lot of things without necessarily having to use force. If you use
[Guest 1]: rhetoric, if you create a narrative environment where people's sense of right and wrong is
[Guest 1]: determined by what you have done, people will feel you don't even have to lift a finger.
[Amit Varma]: People will feel that something wrong has happened. A lot of the other countries will
[Guest 1]: join you. Forming coalitions becomes easier. In a way, if you want to put it into very
[Guest 1]: stark terms, your own cost of action becomes much lower. Your cost benefit ratio becomes
[Guest 1]: much lower, because you achieve the same outcome with much lower expenditure of resources.
[Guest 1]: So that's that's rhetoric. That's what rhetoric does for you.
[Guest 2]: Correct. Yeah, every act needn't necessarily be an act of coercion, right? So if you want
[Guest 2]: every country to collaborate with you, there are two ways, right? Every time you go and
[Guest 2]: say that, you know, I have power over you, if you don't do this, I will be you will be
[Guest 2]: having sanctions or whatnot. The other way is that just the countries believe in what
[Guest 2]: you have said or believed because of what you've acted before or believed in the larger
[Guest 2]: principles that you have propagated for whatever reason, right? Whether you believe it or not
[Guest 2]: is a secondary thing. So there is a lot of things which can happen in through the second
[Guest 2]: way, right? So in that sense, rhetoric does play a role in international affairs.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I think, you know, the two ways that I would see it is as is a negative sum game
[Amit Varma]: where you use force and etc, etc. Negative sum game or zero sum game as the case may
[Amit Varma]: be, in the case of war, it's a negative sum usually, and the positive sum game where you
[Amit Varma]: speak to common interests and talk about how we can both be better off. But it also seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that you know, whatever rhetoric you might spout, the other country when they are
[Amit Varma]: considering what you might do or might not do, they are just looking and they know you're
[Amit Varma]: realist as well, right? All in a sense, the entire foreign policy community, I would imagine
[Amit Varma]: is one country, right? They kind of know everybody that they know what people share interests
[Amit Varma]: and values are, they know what the levers are, you know, they know what the carrots
[Amit Varma]: and sticks they can use against India, for example. So everybody would discount everybody
[Amit Varma]: else's rhetoric and just look at what their interests are. And like, I think in this current
[Amit Varma]: situation, for example, there was this big outcry on Twitter that India should take Ukraine
[Amit Varma]: side and speak out against Russia and not abstain and all that. And my point was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Twitter pe rhetoric theek hai, but in the real world, there are costs. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, the way I would have looked at what India did was that you got to do what you
[Amit Varma]: feel is in your interest, which at that point in time, the establishment felt was abstaining.
[Amit Varma]: And then you can dress it up in whatever rhetoric you want, or whatever principles you want.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, part of that rhetoric might well have been strategic autonomy, no matter
[Amit Varma]: how incoherent it is, but you take an action according to your interests and according
[Amit Varma]: to what you can do or cannot do. And then you figure out the principles to sort of dress
[Amit Varma]: that up with. So is that something you'd agree with?
[Guest 2]: Again, I'll sort of push back against that, in the sense that these morals or these narratives
[Guest 2]: and stories which we tell are not constant, right? And they are the overton window sort
[Guest 2]: of moves over time. So I'll give you an example. Think in terms of what should nation states
[Guest 2]: do in times of humanitarian disasters. Now, now the large the rhetoric over the last few
[Guest 2]: years has been, if you are a great power of any significance, you should be doing something
[Guest 2]: there, right? And in reality, also, now a lot of nation states do that, you know, so
[Guest 2]: the rhetoric, which was said many years ago, that rhetoric now is sort of become a norm,
[Guest 2]: which generally nation states follow, and some do deviate, but there is a perceptible
[Guest 2]: change in how nation states would respond to. So that in that sense, there's an example
[Guest 2]: where rhetoric comes before that action.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a great point. Let's kind of talk about world orders, and just understanding
[Amit Varma]: the state of the world. And you know, you guys had this chapter, which was also a discussion
[Amit Varma]: paper, I think you did from the book India's Marathon, where you spoke about different
[Amit Varma]: scenarios of how the world order can kind of evolve or different kinds of equilibria
[Amit Varma]: which can emerge in one of them is what you call the Great Walls sort of theory. And your
[Amit Varma]: argument being that Russia, Ukraine actually doesn't kind of change that we are that is
[Amit Varma]: a world order that we are in and some some ways it might even solidify it. So can you
[Amit Varma]: sort of explain to me the outline of that? And very briefly, if the outlines of the other
[Amit Varma]: kind of possible world orders and you know, what is special about this one, and so on
[Guest 2]: and so forth?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I'll attempt that. So yeah, so this is basically a model that we'd made and like
[Guest 2]: all models, it is just somewhat useful and definitely wrong. But the model that we tried
[Guest 2]: to imagine was that a lot of people when they talk about world orders, that we are only
[Guest 2]: talking about who's the hegemon, right? Is it US, China, etc. But probably there are
[Guest 2]: more dimensions to what the world order is. And that's why we thought that two important
[Guest 2]: dimensions would be the global distribution of power, which is the geopolitical angle.
[Guest 2]: And the second is, what is the distribution or what is the way the economics is arranged?
[Guest 2]: What is the geoeconomics looks like, right? So that's the second axis. So we constructed
[Guest 2]: world order scenarios at the intersection of how the world might go on the economic
[Guest 2]: side, and how the world might go on the political side. So there were some trends which we saw
[Guest 2]: on the political side, right, which you can imagine, one is US being a sole superpower,
[Guest 2]: or there is sort of a cozy relationship between US and China, which is a cooperative G2, that's
[Guest 2]: the geopolitical trend. The third one was you could have actually a confrontation, outright
[Guest 2]: confrontation, or you could have a competitive thing where you have competition plus confrontation.
[Guest 2]: And finally, there's something called the multipolar world where all nation states,
[Guest 2]: all important nation states have their own nicely marked spheres of influences where
[Guest 2]: they are the most important power. Now, this is on the political side. On the economic
[Guest 2]: side, also key trends being if you look at what is the situation of trade, global growth,
[Guest 2]: automation, etc. Based on that, we had a few trends that we could look at. So there were
[Guest 2]: a global recession trend, a secular stagnation trend, a new economic boom trend, and a great
[Guest 2]: disruption trend. So now, broadly, if you look at intersection of these economic and
[Guest 2]: political scenarios, you get you get world order scenarios that you can imagine, right.
[Guest 2]: So the Great Walls scenario is at the intersection of a new Cold War politics and a secular stagnation
[Guest 2]: economics. Okay, so what does new Cold War politics means that yes, there are there is
[Guest 2]: there are two powers, US, China, and broadly, there is a confrontational relationship between
[Guest 2]: them, not war necessarily, but really confrontational. And both have decided that you want to decrease
[Guest 2]: each other's powers as their main geopolitical aim. And second one would be secular stagnation
[Guest 2]: on the economic side, where after COVID-19, we've seen the global economy is still recovering,
[Guest 2]: the inflation rates are high in many countries, etc. So that sort of marks the economic side.
[Guest 2]: There is also a lot of questions being asked about whether we can go back to the free trade
[Guest 2]: scenario of the 19 late 1990s or 2000s, because China took disproportionate advantage of it,
[Guest 2]: right. So there are also those questions of whether you want to limit trade, whether you
[Guest 2]: should form groups in which you trade freely, but not with the world at large, right. So
[Guest 2]: that that is what the economic trend looks like. Now, at the intersection of these two
[Guest 2]: trends, we get what is called the Great Wall scenario, right. And the way we defined it
[Guest 2]: is there were sort of three major trends, one stable geopolitics and dynamic geoeconomics.
[Guest 2]: So what you see is one US is countering China as an overriding national priority. And then
[Guest 2]: there are also supply chains are getting reoriented to reduce dependence on China, which I already
[Guest 2]: mentioned. So that is the trend which is still continued, right. What we'd written in terms
[Guest 2]: of the political side was that if you look at what has happened with Russia, Ukraine,
[Guest 2]: probably it is more likely that Russia and China, because of the limited options now
[Guest 2]: available with Russia, it will probably go on the side of China even more in the next
[Guest 2]: few years. And that's why what we are saying is it's not that the world order scenario
[Guest 2]: is probably changed dramatically, but possibly it has just hardened these lines, right. Now,
[Guest 2]: Russia has very little option but to now take help of China given the unprecedented sanctions
[Guest 2]: and etc, which has happened. So those things are what are likely to play out, right. So
[Guest 2]: that is on the geopolitics side. We are also seeing, you know, one too many economic webs.
[Guest 2]: So again, like I said, a lot of questions being asked about whether we should have the
[Guest 2]: same kind of trade, movement of ideas, movement of labor, goods, services, like it was earlier,
[Guest 2]: right. So there is probably a question around that and probably we might see this reorientation
[Guest 2]: of supply chains. It's already being talked about, it's already being attempted to carve
[Guest 2]: out something which is not the same way as earlier where China dominates and becomes
[Guest 2]: a trading partner of most of the nation states which matter, right. And finally, there is
[Guest 2]: a new age of multilateralism in the sense that, again, UN and the idea of UN allied
[Guest 2]: institutions like the WTO, etc, have lost a lot of their shine because of what has happened.
[Guest 2]: So there is also a question of, do we require a new age of multilateralism where different
[Guest 2]: countries form their own smaller groups and then they decide their actions there rather
[Guest 2]: than this big umbrella of a world government aspirational kind of UN, which has not delivered
[Guest 2]: on the kind of results that it was hoping for. So this is broadly how this great world
[Guest 2]: scenario looks like. And our assessment, at least preliminary assessment, after the last
[Guest 2]: few days, was that it just hardens this boundary. We are going even more so in this space where
[Guest 2]: the politics gets defined as a new Cold War kind of scenario and there is already a secular
[Guest 2]: stagnation. So Russia and China getting together against a lot of other countries, which are
[Guest 2]: also getting together in turn because of what Russia did in Europe, right. And earlier again
[Guest 2]: in Europe, there was this question of whether we are still buying a lot of oil from Russia.
[Guest 2]: So is there a need to take a stance against Russia, etc. But what Putin has done in Ukraine
[Guest 2]: just makes it clear to them that there is no other option. So there is overwhelming
[Guest 2]: sort of a unity that you see in purpose between European countries and the US, which you didn't
[Guest 2]: see until now for a lot of years, right. So you are seeing a lot of defense pending commitments
[Guest 2]: also coming from countries like Germany, etc. So there is this sort of coalescing of two
[Guest 2]: opposite poles happening because of this Russia-Ukraine model.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. And this, you know, before I kind of double click on that for all of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners who might have been surprised to hear you say that, you know, that this model
[Amit Varma]: is probably useful, but definitely wrong. I'll just point out that that's obviously
[Amit Varma]: harking to the famous quote about all models being wrong, but some models are useful. And
[Amit Varma]: the world is so deeply complex that no model is actually ever going to be right. What you
[Amit Varma]: want to build is you want to build useful models, you want to build frameworks of looking
[Amit Varma]: at the world that explain as much of it as it possibly can. And, and, and I found that
[Amit Varma]: this is actually a fantastic model, because looking through your paper, a lot of what
[Amit Varma]: you said actually seemed so prescient, like, when you spoke of, you know, the second of
[Amit Varma]: the three aspects that you spoke of from one to many economic webs. And, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: I'll quote from what you wrote in that paper, you and your co-authors where you wrote, in
[Amit Varma]: the post COVID-19 world, many great walls of China may come up a new version of the
[Amit Varma]: Iron Curtain, where the world is split into three economic webs, one dominated by US markets
[Amit Varma]: and investments, one by Chinese markets and investments, and a more diffuse collection
[Amit Varma]: of middle powers who independently strike bargains with the US and China led economic
[Amit Varma]: webs and form their own networks of trade with friendly countries, stop code. And this
[Amit Varma]: is you were talking about what may happen in a post COVID world. And part of it seems
[Amit Varma]: to already have happened in unexpected ways with Russia, invading Ukraine, like, again,
[Amit Varma]: from one of your newsletters, and this was RHA writing about it, I learned about the
[Amit Varma]: concept of weaponized interdependence, which the way Daniel Dresner defines it is a weaponized
[Amit Varma]: interdependent interdependence court is defined as a condition under which an actor can exploit
[Amit Varma]: his position in an embedded network to gain a bargaining advantage over others in a contained
[Amit Varma]: system stop code. And to break it down, to give a concrete example of this, there is
[Amit Varma]: a swift payment system. So you want to impose sanctions on Iran, what do you do, you take
[Amit Varma]: them out of the swift system, and they can't do anything in an economic sense. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you've basically, you've got your hegemony as the academic word term would go over that
[Amit Varma]: financial payments, and you can really hurt someone. But what happened here with Russia
[Amit Varma]: is that it didn't quite work for a number of reasons. I mean, one reason, of course,
[Amit Varma]: was that and when, you know, Biden said that, okay, we'll take them out of the swift system,
[Amit Varma]: he made an exception for energy companies because he had to. And, you know, RHA has
[Amit Varma]: this great quote where he writes, all the network interdependence by itself doesn't
[Amit Varma]: create real hard assets on the ground. It only facilitates a trade in a manner that
[Amit Varma]: reduces friction. The real world operates a step removed from this. Russia has cheap
[Amit Varma]: energy and the EU needs it. And the EU doesn't love Ukraine more than the cheap assured heating
[Amit Varma]: in their homes. That's a reality. The other thing we learned is that any kind of freezing
[Amit Varma]: out of a node in a global interconnected network doesn't put that node away for good. This
[Amit Varma]: network is so vast, with so many strands crisscrossing them, that quite soon a new equilibrium is
[Amit Varma]: reached, order is restored and the freeze circumvented. The simple lesson here is that
[Amit Varma]: cyber warfare, paralyzing a network or cutting someone loose from the interdependence are
[Amit Varma]: legitimate and novel weapons in international conflicts. But when it comes to the crunch,
[Amit Varma]: real assets trump everything, stop quote. And this is exactly what, you know, you speak
[Amit Varma]: about from one to many economic webs kind of playing out. And this is fascinating. And
[Amit Varma]: is there then a harsh wake up call for the US, where they thought that they had these
[Amit Varma]: powerful levers, and now they've suddenly realized that, hey, wait a minute, we actually
[Amit Varma]: don't, the world will go on without us.
[Guest 1]: Amit, before we go to the US, this is a good point in time to point out something about
[Guest 1]: Europe. There is absolutely no doubt about interdependence, etc, and the need for energy.
[Guest 1]: But you cannot, you know, the startling thing about the Ukraine conflict, and if you have
[Guest 1]: to blame somebody, you have to blame Europe. Because here you are in 2008, or 2007-2008,
[Guest 1]: where Putin does his first jerking of Ukraine. He turns off the taps and punishes the Ukrainians
[Guest 1]: in Ukraine during the winter. And they realized for the first time, that Putin can actually
[Guest 1]: use energy as a weapon to get those coercive political points. Now, you're Europe, and
[Guest 1]: you spent the last 15 years having built some pipelines and buying gas from Europe, because
[Guest 1]: you believe that after the Soviet Union fell, Russia has to be accommodated. And you know,
[Guest 1]: you don't want an impoverished Russia. So you buy good relations with Russians by buying,
[Guest 1]: you know, gas from those pipelines, which are actually Soviet era. You were buying this
[Guest 1]: during the Soviet Union also, right? So Europe was buying gas. And then suddenly in 2008,
[Guest 1]: you see Putin playing hockey with the pipes, and using pipes to twist arms of the Ukrainians.
[Guest 1]: And what do you do? Oh, I mean, if you're a sensible person, what you would say is that,
[Guest 1]: look, I think this is a problem here. This guy is using gas to twist arms. So we should
[Guest 1]: reduce our dependency on Russia. What does the European Union do? They increase their
[Guest 1]: dependency on Russia. Not only do they buy gas from Russia, they buy it in pipelines
[Guest 1]: from Russia, right? And come to the pipelines a little later. Not only do they buy pipelines,
[Guest 1]: gas from pipelines, they buy gas in pipelines that bypass other countries, right? The Nord
[Guest 1]: Stream 2, for example, right? So you're signaling to the guy that, look, I'm giving you my cojones,
[Guest 1]: you can squeeze it whenever you want. And that guy decided to do it. Now, why is pipeline
[Guest 1]: a problem? The pipeline is a problem because it connects one buyer to one seller, right?
[Guest 1]: One set of buyers to one seller. And that relationship is inherently unstable, because,
[Guest 1]: you know, the buyer can say, I don't want to buy, and then the whole thing goes for
[Guest 1]: a toss. Or the seller can say, I don't want to sell, and then coerce the buyer, right?
[Guest 2]: So for example, that was a problem with this famous IPI gas pipeline, which they were talking
[Guest 1]: about, Iran, Pakistan, India, where it would originate in Iran, pass through Pakistan,
[Guest 1]: and we would buy. Which meant Iranians could coerce us, the Pakistanis could coerce us,
[Guest 1]: and we could do nothing to them. And these are people, I mean, the Pakistanis, we have
[Guest 1]: a problem with those guys. I mean, they have a problem with us, whatever, however you want
[Guest 1]: to define it. So this is what happens in Europe. Now, how do you still buy natural gas, but
[Guest 1]: not use pipelines? Use liquefied natural gas, LNG, right? Mercifully, India took the LNG
[Guest 1]: route. We decided not to do the pipeline, we took the LNG route. Europe did not. The
[Guest 1]: first LNG terminals were announced, I think earlier this year, Germany's terminal. So
[Guest 1]: if you have an LNG terminal, you have a port where liquefied natural gas comes on ships,
[Guest 1]: and you could buy it from anybody. You could buy it from the Russians, you could buy it
[Guest 1]: from the Venezuelans, you could buy it, whoever has gas, you can just ship it there, right?
[Guest 1]: So buy it from the market. So it's a market based solution. And there are, you know, short
[Guest 1]: and long term ways to manage your risk. Europe doesn't do that. Okay, they buy from gas.
[Guest 1]: And then what happens, the Fukushima happens. And these guys say, Oh, my God, nuclear, Fukushima,
[Guest 1]: and they turn off the nuclear reactors. And when what happens to your energy, where do
[Guest 2]: you need to get energy from? From Russia again. And look at the Fukushima thing. You know
[Guest 1]: how many people died in the Fukushima nuclear disaster? Zero. Not a single person died because
[Guest 1]: of radiation, right? All the deaths which happened, they happened due to other reasons,
[Unknown]: due to flooding and some accidents and so on. Not a single person died because of radiation.
[Guest 1]: And you turned off all the reactors, and you bought gas from Russia. And Putin walks into
[Guest 1]: Crimea, you can do nothing. Putin shoots down a freaking airliner, you do nothing. Putin
[Guest 1]: now invades, surrounds Ukraine on all three sides, you could do nothing. And only after
[Guest 1]: the guy actually, you know, breaks the eggshell, the tanks roll in, and Zelensky makes this
[Guest 2]: wonderful speech at the EU, you decide, Oh, my God, yes, we were wrong. Now we're going
[Guest 1]: to ship weapons to those guys, and we're going to get LNG and so on, right? So I think stupidity
[Guest 1]: can't be insured against, you know, the EU's stupidity is a charitable way of putting it,
[Guest 1]: the EU was stupid. The non-charitable way is that you can't rule out corruption in this.
[Guest 1]: The fact that Russian money can grease political machines in democratic countries is well known.
[Guest 1]: And they've probably, you know, purchased this influence, because I cannot imagine a
[Guest 1]: bunch of smart people, like the strategists in Germany and France and the rest of Europe
[Guest 1]: falling for this, you know, kindergarten level ploy of putting all your eggs in one basket.
[Guest 2]: Just to add to Nitin's last point, that a lot of recent literature suggests that, you
[Guest 2]: know, a lot of foreign policy decisions can be explained either by public choice or by
[Guest 2]: other reasons, right? So a lot of times when foreign policy is discussed, it is discussed
[Guest 2]: only in the sense of, you know, you taking nation state as a unit actor, and what is
[Guest 2]: in their interest, etc. But there are real domestic interests have a lot to play on international
[Guest 2]: affairs as well. So a lot of these can be explained by probably there was also this
[Guest 2]: angle of domestic corruption or other things. And that's why you get the outcomes that you
[Guest 2]: get in even classic realist terms, you would have said, like, what, why would you even
[Guest 2]: do that? But if you take into account domestic considerations, electoral politics, maybe
[Guest 2]: you will be able to explain these results then.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and just to kind of double click on what you said about Fukushima and sort of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, nuclear power, which is, you know, it's kind of one of the most bizarre movements
[Amit Varma]: that has happened, how Germany moved away from nuclear power. And that's still in an
[Amit Varma]: ongoing debate with France. And I'll link to that, to an excellent op-ed in the New
[Amit Varma]: York Times by Steven Pinker, among others, and two co-authors, where I'll just quote
[Amit Varma]: a para from that. And this is a digression, but it's kind of, you know, I keep coming
[Amit Varma]: back to this where they write, the authors write, quote, in 60 years of nuclear power,
[Amit Varma]: only three accidents have raised public alarm. Three Mile Island in 1979, which killed no
[Amit Varma]: one Fukushima in 2011, which killed no one, brackets many deaths resulted from the tsunami
[Amit Varma]: and some from a panicked evacuation near the plant. And Chernobyl in 1986, a result of
[Amit Varma]: extraordinary Soviet bungling, which killed 31 in the accident and perhaps several thousand
[Amit Varma]: from cancer, around the same number killed by coal emissions every day. Even if we accepted
[Amit Varma]: recent claims that Soviet and international authorities covered up 10s of 1000s of Chernobyl
[Amit Varma]: deaths, the death toll from 60 years of nuclear power would still equal about one month of
[Amit Varma]: coal related deaths. And this just makes me absolutely mad because so much of what is
[Amit Varma]: happening around climate change can actually be mitigated by just embracing nuclear, which
[Amit Varma]: is the safest form of energy by a massive order of magnitude. And, you know, you know,
[Amit Varma]: leaving aside the old dogmas of oh, it's not safe and all that, because, you know, we kind
[Amit Varma]: of have the data, the technology is advanced a lot. And Chernobyl was really more about
[Amit Varma]: the dangers of bureaucracy and an ossified system of governance, rather than nuclear
[Amit Varma]: power per se. And this is, you know, and speaking of climate change, you know, one of the things
[Amit Varma]: you say in your Great Walls, sort of formulation is that it makes reaching agreements on climate
[Amit Varma]: change also next to kind of impossible over there. Yeah, so you know, since we're talking
[Amit Varma]: about the response of the different powers of Europe and all that, you know, let's for
[Amit Varma]: a moment, go back to the US and you mentioned Nord Stream 2. And, you know, one of the blunders
[Amit Varma]: that the US made involved that like I'll quote Neil Ferguson here, where he compares Biden
[Amit Varma]: to Dostoevsky's idiot. And Ferguson says, in Russian literature, there is a great novel,
[Amit Varma]: Dostoevsky's an idiot, Biden is an idiot. The reason this happened is because the Biden
[Amit Varma]: administration slowed down deliveries of armaments to Ukraine, lifted the sanctions on the Nord
[Amit Varma]: Stream 2 pipeline that was supposed to bypass Ukraine, signaled to Russia that the US would
[Amit Varma]: not support Ukraine militarily, and therefore made it clear to Putin that he had an opportunity
[Amit Varma]: to take military action with only sanctions to fear. The administration's strategy was
[Amit Varma]: to threaten the worst sanctions as if sanctions were going to deter Putin. Then they tried
[Amit Varma]: it something even crazier, which was to say you're going to invade and we know the date,
[Amit Varma]: as if that was somehow going to stop him from invading. And the worst thing they tried was
[Amit Varma]: to get the Chinese to dissuade him from invading when the Chinese had given him the green light
[Amit Varma]: on the condition that he didn't go until after the Beijing Olympics. And, you know, and he
[Amit Varma]: paints this completely as Biden's debacle in the course of a roundtable, which Barry
[Amit Varma]: Weishaus, in which Francis Fukuyama, by the way, holds the opposite view. So I'll link
[Amit Varma]: to that so you can read both views. But what's your sense of, you know, what the US could
[Amit Varma]: have done here, because a new verb that has now come into the English language is a verb
[Amit Varma]: Ukraine. And for someone to get Ukraine is that you promise someone that enter the fight
[Amit Varma]: and we will kind of support you. And and then, you know, you're not there when they enter
[Amit Varma]: the fight. And by the way, I'm going to take a brief digression here to tell you this delightful
[Amit Varma]: story of Mr. Madiyar. Have you heard the story of Mr. Madiyar? You couldn't have because
[Amit Varma]: I just heard it last night. But I heard it from my friend Naren Shenoy. And I take the
[Amit Varma]: permission to tell you the story that once back in the day, his family, when he was a
[Amit Varma]: little child, used to have next door neighbors called Mr. and Mrs. Madiyar. Right. And one
[Amit Varma]: day, they kind of noticed that a thief seemed to have broken into the yard or into an upstairs
[Amit Varma]: balcony or forget exactly what. So they managed to scare the thief away. And the thief then
[Amit Varma]: jumps into the Madiyar's compound. So they immediately phone call Mr. Madiyar from the
[Amit Varma]: landline and they tell Mr. Madiyar that listen, we think there's a thief in your compound,
[Amit Varma]: he may still be there, you better watch out. And then from the window, they are looking
[Amit Varma]: at Mr. Madiyar's house to see what action Mr. Madiyar takes. And soon the door opens.
[Amit Varma]: And they find a reluctant Mrs. Madiyar being pushed out by Mr. Madiyar. And he's telling
[Amit Varma]: her to just go and check and don't worry, I'm here for you. You know, so, Naren uses
[Amit Varma]: as an analogy for, you know, Mrs. Madiyar, of course, is being Ukraine here. And Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Madiyar is totally sort of chilling. And the story of how Mr. and Mrs. Madiyar fell in
[Amit Varma]: love is also hilarious, but it's probably not apropos to this Russia-Ukraine discussion.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you feel about all that, you know, the role that Europe played, where they are
[Amit Varma]: assuring Ukraine that, hey, we are on your side and NATO and etc, etc, even though they
[Amit Varma]: are so dependent that they know that there's not much they can do and Ukraine is basically
[Amit Varma]: on its own and then America doing the same thing and America in a sense blundering. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there's an argument to be made that America has been blundering from, you know,
[Amit Varma]: George W. Bush's time, where through Obama, through Trump, through Biden, now, they've
[Amit Varma]: just been blundering on this issue completely. So what's your sense of this?
[Guest 1]: You know, I think the US political discourse, and the political academic discourse is, is
[Guest 1]: just, it's just so cute, right? Because, you know, somehow they sort of connect everything
[Guest 1]: which is happening in the world to the policies of the current leadership, with a veneer of
[Guest 1]: saying that we are actually bungling, we are not good. In a way, it's like what we do in
[Guest 1]: India, right? That, oh, you know, everything that the government does, can be criticized,
[Guest 1]: and it's absolutely wrong, and so bungled, and so wrong. And because it's in the English
[Guest 1]: language, everybody else who speaks in the English language also takes that trope, and
[Guest 1]: that becomes conversation, right? So in this case, a lot of what, you know, Biden did or
[Guest 1]: didn't do seems to be largely irrelevant to this, right? Because if you have to pick the
[Guest 1]: point where the US might have gotten it wrong, is going to be about 25 years ago, 20 to 25
[Guest 1]: years ago, after Yeltsin, and after just after Putin takes over, where you're not able to
[Guest 1]: manage the divergence with Russia well enough. As Putin said, you don't want us to be part
[Guest 1]: of your side, but why do you want us as your enemy, right? But if you look at the choices
[Guest 1]: made in 2002, Russia didn't look like a big, powerful player, it looked like a middling
[Guest 1]: power, which did have very nasty intentions, and so on. And the level of nationalism or,
[Guest 1]: you know, the kind of support for Putin, the kind of aggressive policy didn't exist, it
[Guest 1]: was not a big economic player. So you could say that the Americans sort of disregarded
[Guest 1]: the possibility that Russia can be a big player in 10-20 years from now, right? So they sort
[Guest 1]: of overlooked Russian sensitivities, not even interests, sensitivities, right? So, which
[Guest 1]: is, you know, for example, trying to get the post-Russian, post-Soviet republics into NATO
[Guest 1]: and EU and so on. So, that, I think, can be positioned as a strategic error, which the
[Guest 1]: Americans made about 25 years ago. A big strategic error which they made was not to renew the
[Guest 1]: anti-ballistic missiles treaty, because the whole set of arms control relationships which
[Guest 1]: the Soviets and the Americans had signed during the Cold War, were actually stabilizing. They
[Guest 1]: tied both hands, which meant that things couldn't get out of hand. Sorry for mixing up the metaphors,
[Guest 1]: right? So, but once the Bush administration walked out of the ABM, it created two things,
[Guest 1]: right? One is Russia was also out of the ABM. And second, it created a precedent that you
[Guest 1]: could walk out of, you know, strategic arms control relationships that you had written,
[Unknown]: which you had signed 20-30 years ago, right? So, that becomes an actual problem, because now you
[Guest 1]: have missile proliferation, all of that thing happening. Now, the problem with this narrative
[Guest 1]: of the United States disregarding Russian sensitivities is simply this, that the post-Soviet
[Guest 1]: republics have agency. So, if Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia want to be part of the European Union,
[Guest 1]: if Ukraine wants to join NATO, how can you disregard their agency? It's not that just
[Guest 1]: that the United States gets to make the call, right? They get to make the call. I mean,
[Guest 1]: what are they independent for, if they can't exercise their independence in ways that they
[Guest 1]: want to secure themselves, the way they perceive themselves? The Lithuanians want to be part of
[Guest 1]: the West, the Estonians want to be part of the West. Now, are you going to say that, oh,
[Guest 1]: the Americans should now disregard the interests of these independent countries, just because
[Guest 1]: Putin will be upset, right? So, if you accept the fact that these are post-Soviet sovereign states,
[Guest 1]: they have agency, you respect their independence, they have interests, then it's a convergence of
[Guest 1]: both sides. It just so happens that Putin dislikes this. Now, the second error is,
[Guest 1]: knowing that this is a possibility, let's say about 10 years ago, you suddenly feel, okay,
[Guest 1]: after Putin did his Georgia thing, and after he did his Ukraine, cutting off the gas,
[Guest 1]: you realize that this guy is going to cause trouble. Did you do what we needed to do to
[Guest 1]: manage the guy? That you did, right? Because you were caught in this Obama era, oh, the US
[Guest 1]: has overextended itself. That's the narrative, you know, the narrative which Pranay was talking
[Guest 1]: about. You told yourself that US has overextended itself. Oh, you know, we need to look inwards,
[Guest 1]: we are not a great power. You know, if you look at the Obama era rhetoric, it was all
[Guest 1]: about being humble, about knowing the limits of your actions, and so forth, right? And that
[Guest 1]: not only signaled to the rest of the world that you're not a big player, and Putin said, oh,
[Guest 2]: okay, these guys think that they're not big players. So maybe I should be encouraged,
[Guest 1]: you know, let me do something. And it also told Americans to redirect their resource investments
[Guest 1]: in terms of defense and other things into other things. They might be, I mean, every government
[Guest 1]: has a budget constraint. Of course, the US government has a budget constraint. But how you
[Unknown]: spend your budget follows your narrative. You know, if you spin a narrative that we are a
[Guest 1]: weak power, we have to consolidate, and then your budget says we're going to build a big Navy,
[Guest 1]: then people will ask you, you know, you just told me that, you know, we want to consolidate and now
[Guest 1]: you want money for the Navy, right? So, the Americans got it wrong during the Obama era,
[Guest 1]: both with respect to Russia, and with respect to China, right? They allowed China to
[Guest 1]: reach a critical mass without having enough backstops. And they overlooked the fact that
[Unknown]: they had to put some irons in the fire in order to manage Russia if should the need arise,
[Guest 1]: right? Discouraging Europe from doing this stupid energy strategy, for example.
[Guest 1]: That's something which Americans could have done. But they did, as you said, they, you know,
[Guest 1]: went on and went into Nord Stream, encouraged Nord Stream. Any self-respecting strategist
[Guest 1]: would have said Nord Stream 2 is a bad idea, right? In any sense of the word. So it's that is where I
[Guest 1]: think the mistakes were. They were in the Obama administration rather than the Biden administration.
[Amit Varma]: Let me follow up with like a couple of questions on that. And one is you say that that is when
[Amit Varma]: America could have done something. And in fact, during the Obama administration, they could have
[Amit Varma]: done something about China as well. So question one is what specifically could they have done?
[Amit Varma]: And question two is that earlier we spoke about how national interest is defined from within a
[Amit Varma]: country by the elites or whatever, and you go according to that. Now, another definition of
[Amit Varma]: the American national interest could easily be that we should not try to be a global hegemon.
[Amit Varma]: We should just chill, look after our own economy, be friends with everyone, do our own thing, not
[Amit Varma]: try to meddle everywhere else in the world, citing principles, citing democracy, citing blah, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: just do our own thing. And I have a fair amount of sympathy for that view. If I was American,
[Amit Varma]: I would have a lot of sympathy for that view, that let's just mind our own business and not
[Amit Varma]: mess around in this way. So, you know, so the idea that it is that America has a responsibility to
[Amit Varma]: intervene in all of these to control the rise of China to, you know, control the rise of Russia or
[Amit Varma]: to control Russia's, you know, nefarious desires is also comes from looking at the world in a
[Amit Varma]: particular prism, but there are different prisms. So that's one question that why this prism over
[Guest 1]: that or is it? Yeah, I mean, I don't think it's a responsibility thing at all. It's not America's
[Amit Varma]: responsibility. It's in America's interests, right? But you can define that interest differently,
[Guest 1]: right? Like I pointed out. That's why, that's what, see, if you are a superpower, you're not,
[Guest 1]: see, I think we are not mentally equipped to understand the superpowers, responsibilities,
[Guest 1]: and interests, right? And the responsibilities that come from interest, not responsibilities,
[Guest 1]: as in altruistic responsibilities, right? We are not in that thing. You can't be a leader in the
[Guest 1]: game. You can't be a world leader without having to do certain things. And those things are not
[Guest 1]: the kind of things which India will do, right? So for example, if something happens in Ukraine,
[Guest 1]: we could say, hey, guys, you know, we have 20,000 students there, once we get them out,
[Guest 1]: our job is done, we don't have a dog in the fight. Nothing there will influence us and affect us.
[Guest 1]: If you're in the United States, it's not like that. The moment the Americans overlook the fact
[Guest 1]: that a red line has been crossed, there is a domino effect, a series of things will happen to
[Guest 1]: you politically, militarily, technologically, economically, which will affect your interests,
[Guest 1]: right? Now, in the Syria thing, I can't remember the exact thing which Obama did. But he said,
[Guest 1]: there's a particular red line in Syria, that if you cross the red line, we'll do something,
[Guest 1]: right? And the guys crossed the red line. And he didn't do anything.
[Guest 1]: And what signal does it send? And you have the remaining, you know, Putin walking into Crimea,
[Guest 1]: the Turkish guys doing something, Xi Jinping walking into South China Sea.
[Guest 1]: Because the calculation is this, that if you are not willing to defend a red line,
[Guest 1]: which you said there is a red line, I'm quite like, I'm quite rightly, I mean, I can be justified in
[Unknown]: believing that you won't do anything when you have no red lines. You don't have a red line in South
[Guest 1]: China Sea, so I'll go and encroach there, right? So, you soon start losing the status and the
[Guest 1]: preeminence as a superpower, right? It's like the British government now, right? If you're content
[Guest 1]: becoming like the British are today as a small country with, I don't know, 80 million people,
[Guest 1]: 60 million people, still a lot of military power and economic power, but you're not a force in
[Guest 1]: international relations that used to be 100 years ago, right? If you're willing to accept that,
[Guest 1]: then you could, you know, go for that, let's hunker down, let's manage our own business,
[Guest 1]: let's pull east of Suez, all that makes a British state, right? And the British did not because
[Guest 1]: they wanted to, the British did because they were forced to, because after the Second World War,
[Guest 1]: they were a spent force, they just didn't have the resources to sustain that.
[Guest 1]: The Americans are not in that situation.
[Amit Varma]: Just to sort of clarify what I meant, you know, what you say is right, that if you say there's
[Amit Varma]: a red line, and if you cross it, we will do something and then you do nothing. Obviously,
[Amit Varma]: that affects your credibility. But that's if you're playing the game. If you're not playing
[Amit Varma]: the game, if you just say not my circus, not my monkeys, we'll do our thing, then what's the
[Amit Varma]: problem with that? Like, one of the things that you seem to be saying is that if you are the
[Amit Varma]: biggest boy in school, it is your responsibility to be the bully. But what if the biggest boy in
[Amit Varma]: school just wants to chill in a corner? Now, is there then a follow up argument that if it does
[Amit Varma]: not, you know, act according to his size and power to, you know, go all across the world and stop
[Amit Varma]: China in the South China Sea, and maybe, you know, Arunachal, if it comes to that, then that in some
[Amit Varma]: way, they are going to suffer for it in the long run? Is that the argument that is being made that
[Amit Varma]: it is going to harm your national interest if you don't go out and assert your power?
[Guest 1]: No, no, where we get where we get into a mental trap is when we anthropomorphize it, right? So
[Guest 1]: when you look at the bully, big bully, and so that's that's anthropomorphism won't give you a
[Guest 1]: good frame to understand what the US has to do. The issue is really this, in an international
[Guest 1]: system, you have to be more powerful than everybody else, how much more powerful and
[Guest 1]: as much power as you can get. Because the moment that gap starts reducing, others start sort of
[Guest 1]: encroaching in onto your interests. And those can be very serious ones. I mean, in the old,
[Guest 1]: I mean, 100 years ago, it could be your territory, which is taken away by somebody else.
[Unknown]: It could be as direct as that your territory is taken away, because you decided that that's
[Guest 1]: not core interest, you know, that's, that's my colony in that part of the world, I don't really
[Guest 1]: want to worry too much about the colony, but somebody else will come and take it. And that
[Guest 1]: has consequences, both economically, politically, etc. So it's not that it's not about being a
[Guest 1]: bully, or it's about that kind of emotion, right? It's about holding up an order. That's exactly
[Guest 1]: where we started by talking about order. The moment the United States start under Obama started
[Guest 1]: sort of shrinking its vision of the world, the ability of the United States to uphold that order
[Guest 1]: became much weaker. The willingness, you know, not just your, when you say I'm less willing to
[Guest 1]: uphold this order, you signal this both to your domestic population and to the rest of the world,
[Guest 1]: you tell your people that maintaining this order is no more my business, right? I'm going to,
[Guest 1]: I don't know, jobs for Americans, or whatever Obama was talking about. Or yes, we can, I don't
[Guest 1]: know what that meant. And you also signal to the rest of the world that you're less willing and
[Guest 1]: less inclined to go and do things which are necessary to support order. And that immediately
[Guest 1]: gives license to a lot of other people. That's the point I'm coming to. Because what it is, is
[Guest 1]: your superpower, nature makes you an investor in public goods, very broadly called like public
[Guest 1]: goods. Maintaining that order is your investment in public goods, because of which a lot of people
[Guest 1]: benefit from that, because you did, you know, you're upholding the order. But the biggest
[Guest 1]: beneficiary of that, upholding the order is you yourself, right? And to the extent that you now
[Guest 1]: have, you know, let's say you have to contend with China for influence, right? You've lost that
[Guest 1]: influence. Now, if you have to, you know, let's say the Chinese now walking to Taiwan and take
[Guest 1]: away, take away Taiwan, you've lost an important trading partner, right? Or if, let's say,
[Guest 1]: hypothetically, if India decides that, oh, Hindi, Chinese, bhai bhai, and you know,
[Guest 1]: what is this little border dispute between Xi Jinping and us? Let's become friends with China,
[Guest 1]: the, you know, East shall rise, the US loses the Indian market, right? So, what I'm saying is,
[Guest 1]: it's very hard for a lot of us to see, and I don't claim to see it perfectly either, but I can
[Guest 1]: sympathize with the Washington worldview, from a realist standpoint, right? And I know for sure
[Guest 1]: that our mental models of seeing our neighborhood, the stakes that we have, are very different from
[Guest 1]: what superpower has to do. I mean, we have the luxury of being saying, we don't have a dog in
[Guest 1]: the fight. You know, I don't have to uphold international order, right? I mean, whatever
[Guest 1]: happens in Ukraine is not my business. But if that creates a good world order, then I benefit from it,
[Guest 1]: right? So, I can free ride on that, because I'm a smaller power. I mean, when I say I am talking
[Guest 1]: about the Republic of India, we are a smaller power. But if you are a power which has to create
[Amit Varma]: that, that's a very different game. So, you know, we've kind of spent almost a couple of hours
[Amit Varma]: chatting about this and that and digressing in the delightful way that I often find happens here. But
[Amit Varma]: one of the main purpose of this episode is really to talk about principles of foreign policy through
[Amit Varma]: the prism of, you know, Russia, Ukraine. So, you know, many people are just kind of, especially
[Amit Varma]: people who haven't studied foreign policy or read deeply into it, are kind of confused, right? How
[Amit Varma]: do we look at what's happening? You can have a standpoint as an individual that Russia is wrong,
[Amit Varma]: or Russia is right, or whatever. But how do you look at it? So, you know, you guys have very kindly
[Amit Varma]: drawn up a sort of set of frameworks of looking at it. And the first part of those is about the
[Amit Varma]: role of power. And there, you know, I'm especially, you know, people keep talking about economic
[Amit Varma]: sanctions, we'll do this, we'll do that. And there is one fundamental question of principle that I
[Amit Varma]: kind of want to bring up here, which is that when we talk about sanctions of any sort, or taking
[Amit Varma]: action, and so on, what we risk doing is hurting the people more than the state. Like what I kind
[Amit Varma]: of find important to emphasize is that the Russian people are different from the Russian state. So,
[Amit Varma]: whenever you plan any action about them, you need to think about who are you harming, and who are
[Amit Varma]: you helping. And for me, this was starkest where recently, you know, more than 40 Russian chess
[Amit Varma]: grandmasters, all their top players, barring one, basically signed a letter condemning the invasion.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, another grandmaster, Alexander Grishuk, spoke very eloquently on it, and his
[Amit Varma]: press conferences are known for his wit, and they're hilarious. And here he was deeply affected,
[Amit Varma]: almost in tears when he said that he is so disturbed, and he would support Russia in 99%
[Amit Varma]: of things, but he can't support them in this. And my point was, these are the Russian people,
[Amit Varma]: that you don't want these guys to kind of get harmed. There was some European university which
[Amit Varma]: randomly decided Dostoevsky is Russian, and they took him off the syllabus and tried to cancel him
[Amit Varma]: before it was pointed out that he was a dissenter all his life, the Tsar put him in prison and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, and they kind of brought it back. And I think that this kind of conflation is sometimes
[Amit Varma]: dangerous. And I also think of this in the context of what Walter Russell Mead said about Ukraine,
[Amit Varma]: where I'll quote him, quote, he said, the country has a real split. On one hand, the civil society
[Amit Varma]: movement for democracy is part of a move westward. On the other hand, the political parties, economic
[Amit Varma]: institutions and government bureaucracy remain wedded to structures that date back to Soviet
[Amit Varma]: times. It is a country of powerful oligarchs who often work through the political process.
[Amit Varma]: During this national crisis, we are seeing a new kind of Ukraine struggling to be born,
[Amit Varma]: and I think is going to transform the role of the president and maybe catapult him into a place
[Amit Varma]: he didn't think he was going to be. You know, the Ukrainian response has just been a stunning Putin
[Amit Varma]: may go down in history as a man who made Ukraine a nation, stop quote. And this conflation that
[Amit Varma]: people simplistically often make between a people and a nation is to me disturbing. And Pranay,
[Amit Varma]: we've done an episode in the past about Pakistan, where you've spoken about the difference between
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan's putative state, which is, you know, the military jihadi complex, and the people of
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan, on the other hand. So, at a foreign policy level, how do we kind of think about this?
[Amit Varma]: Because it strikes me that then there is a dilemma that you want to take action against a country
[Amit Varma]: that has done something wrong, but it is a state that has done something wrong and not the people
[Amit Varma]: per se. And you don't really want to hurt the people because in the long run, the people are
[Amit Varma]: perhaps your best hope against that particular regime. You know, I mean, the thing is, I think
[Guest 1]: we get the, we get the framing a little off, right? Sanctions are not a substitute for normal life,
[Guest 1]: right? Sanctions are the substitute for military action. So, you do sanctions because the
[Guest 1]: alternative is military action, which is obviously worse, right? People get hurt much more with
[Guest 1]: military action than they would get with sanctions, right? So, therefore, you know, you look at
[Guest 1]: sanctions as not something which you would do, you know, willfully to somebody. You do it because
[Guest 1]: you have a political purpose to achieve. And the political purpose using military force is much
[Guest 2]: worse than using sanctions. So, you use sanctions as an alternative, as a substitute, right? So,
[Guest 1]: that's, that's how I would see it. Now, the question really was, and is in this case was
[Guest 1]: sanctions on Russia, or the threat of sanctions enough to deter, right? Now, people will argue
[Guest 1]: that, oh, you know, the sanctions are very unprecedented, they will damage Russia's
[Guest 1]: economy. But look, they didn't, they didn't stop Russia from invading in the first place.
[Guest 1]: Because, you know, very clearly, the US said war is off the table. And that, you know, people might
[Guest 1]: criticize that. But I would, you know, I'm not an apologist for the United States, I might be
[Guest 1]: taking their side in this particular conversation, but I'm not an apologist. But you know, why that
[Guest 1]: is necessary? Because these are nuclear, there is a nuclear relationship between the West,
[Guest 2]: with between NATO and Russia. And all of this is automated, you know, there are set procedures,
[Guest 1]: which will happen, if the risk escalates, you know, you know, you just quickly climb up the
[Guest 1]: ladder. So, when the West says, we are not going to use military force, it is a declaration of
[Guest 1]: saying, look, let's keep stability, let's not get into the place where you can escalate to nuclear.
[Guest 1]: So, that's the reason to say, I won't use force. But then I say, I won't use force,
[Guest 1]: I still want to stop the other guy from doing something, what do I do?
[Guest 1]: So, I say, I'll use sanctions. The question is, did the sanctions deter or not? But here's the
[Guest 1]: point. Putin was eyeing Crimea and the Ukraine since 2008 and 2009. He invaded once in 2014.
[Guest 1]: Why didn't he do the whole thing back then? I think there is a fear that there was some
[Guest 1]: sanctions, etc, which would come into play. And back in 2014, maybe he sized up that,
[Guest 1]: you know, sanctions would be such that they will be much harmful to him and to Russia than they
[Guest 1]: are today, because China was not big enough a force. So, now that you have China as a backstop,
[Guest 1]: Putin knows that the sanctions won't hurt the Russian economy as they might have if he had
[Guest 1]: done it in 2008 and 2009. So, you can make an argument that sanctions deterred a Russian
[Guest 1]: invasion of Ukraine for about 10 years. So, that's 10 years time that you buy, you could have done
[Guest 1]: other things, you didn't do other things. That's where the failure is, which is what I was talking
[Guest 1]: about. Now, will sanctions now change anything for Putin and in the war game? I think, as an
[Guest 1]: alternative to doing nothing, this is still a good way. Of course, people will suffer. The moral
[Guest 1]: responsibility of the suffering Russians are not the people who are imposing sanctions, but Putin.
[Guest 1]: So, I mean, nobody would have done these sanctions if Putin hadn't invaded Russia.
[Guest 1]: So, it's just like saying, if there's a person in a family, now I'm anthropomorphizing,
[Guest 1]: but at the risk of violating my own injunction, which is always dangerous. Whenever I violated
[Guest 1]: my own injunction, I've gotten into a lot of trouble. So, but I still violated, which is,
[Guest 1]: if there's a poor family, a person commits a crime, and you throw that person into jail
[Guest 1]: for having committed a crime, the poor family suffers. But that's not a reason for
[Unknown]: not throwing that person into jail, you know. So, I think the same kind of logic applies here.
[Guest 1]: There is pain and suffering, but the moral responsibility for the pain and suffering
[Guest 1]: is on the instigator of that invasion. Again, I'm not an opponent of the Russian side also,
[Guest 1]: I don't oppose the Russians. I mean, I want to look at it in as objective way as possible. But
[Guest 1]: if I'm Russian, I say, look, you got me into trouble. This is an unnecessary war.
[Guest 1]: Right? Why would you have to do this? Because the Russian prosperity before the sanctions of 2014
[Guest 1]: was really linked to interaction with the West. They were doing fairly well in terms of, you know,
[Guest 1]: not just the oligarchs buying yachts, but also startups, technology startups, movement of people
[Guest 1]: and so on. It was quite, it was quite a good deal, you know, 2014 actually destroyed it.
[Amit Varma]: So, a question I asked earlier, but that we kind of digress from, which is, what could the US
[Amit Varma]: have done? Like you spoke about how Obama could have handled it all differently, handled,
[Amit Varma]: treated Russia differently, treated China differently. What specifically could they
[Amit Varma]: have done, which would not have led us here? Oh, it's back. See, one thing they did right is the
[Guest 1]: sanctions, you know, threat of sanctions, right? But I think the biggest mistake which the
[Guest 1]: Europeans, the Americans made back in the Obama era was to accentuate or support the European
[Guest 1]: sense of peace is an entitlement, you know, that we can do these wonderful gas deals with Putin.
[Unknown]: We don't need to invest in our own military resources. NATO is just this talk show, you know,
[Guest 1]: we don't need to have political solidarity in terms of promoting liberal democratic values.
[Guest 1]: They said, oh, you know, there's a set of complacency which the European Union had.
[Guest 2]: And the sort of Americans, instead of trying to sort of nudge them away from it, they sort of
[Guest 1]: accentuated it. To that extent, you know, for all the craziness which Trump did, Trump did two very
[Guest 1]: smart things with respect to the Europeans. First is, he told them that, hey, guys, you have to pay
[Guest 1]: up your share of NATO fees, you know. Now, this is an interesting aside, but I think I should
[Guest 1]: tell it because it's interesting for people. You know, in India's defense expenditure, whenever
[Guest 1]: India's defense budget comes, people say, you know, it's less than 2% of GDP. You know, defense
[Guest 1]: budget should be around 2% of GDP. Then you wonder where did this 2% number come from, right? The 2%
[Guest 1]: number comes from NATO's admission criteria. So, when they formed NATO, they said this is a common
[Guest 1]: defense pact. We want everybody to contribute their membership fees to this common defense pact so
[Guest 1]: that nobody free rides. But you have very rich countries and you have very poor countries in NATO.
[Guest 1]: So, how do you have a fair membership fee? They said 2% of your GDP is your defense expenditure.
[Guest 1]: That's your fair membership fee, right? That was 2%. A lot of these European countries were paying
[Guest 1]: less than the 2%. They were free riding on the American defense expenditure. They enjoyed it,
[Guest 1]: right? And why not? So, Trump told them, hey, guys, you know, this is not quite what you should
[Guest 1]: be doing, right? And the second is also to nudge them into some kind of responsibility towards
[Guest 1]: their own defense. Because they were just saying, in fact, the Europeans used to criticize other
[Guest 1]: countries who would spend more on defense, right? They would condemn India for, why are you spending,
[Guest 1]: you're a poor developing country, why are you spending so much on defense? Why do you need
[Guest 1]: these kind of weapons? And we judge you, right? But look at the neighbors we have. We are not,
[Guest 1]: we don't have the luxury of pretending that we have a peaceful neighborhood. Neither did Europe,
[Guest 1]: they only realized it now. So, I think to you, the American mistake really was to sleep on the
[Guest 1]: wheels of NATO, not push NATO and the Europeans enough on security and defense. I can't think of
[Guest 1]: any direct things that they could have done with respect to Russia. I don't think, I mean, I'm not
[Guest 1]: an expert in Russia-US relations, probably there might be deeper things, little levers and buttons
[Guest 1]: they could have pressed in the third and the fourth decimal place. But I don't think on a big
[Guest 1]: note, they could have done anything which would have been different. Europe is your big player
[Guest 1]: here. And Europe is the one which fell short. So, you know, two hours are up. And Nitin, I know you
[Amit Varma]: have to go, which is like, really sad. This is like, you know, the US abandoning the rest of the
[Amit Varma]: world and what's going to happen, you know, you're supposed to be the next president. So,
[Amit Varma]: then what's going to happen? You know, you're supposed to be the, you're supposed to be the
[Amit Varma]: hegemon in this conversation. But you know, Pranay and I will sort of carry on manfully the best we
[Guest 1]: can after the break. But any final words before you go? I had some final words before this. But
[Guest 1]: once you characterize me as a hegemon and dropping off, I'm like, thinking very hard of what's a good
[Guest 1]: smart one-liner to give you back. Can't think of any. But it was really nice being on your show,
[Guest 1]: Amit. And I think you've, we've managed to get to the bottom of the issue in this episode,
[Guest 1]: instead of the superficial question of what should India do, who's right and who's wrong,
[Guest 1]: which almost everybody and his cousin are talking about. I think it's really nice that we got a
[Guest 1]: chance to go under, to go into the unseen and the unheard areas of this issue. So I'm glad
[Amit Varma]: I was here and I hope to be back soon. Yeah, you know, you're coming back for an eight-hour
[Amit Varma]: episode where we'll talk about your life and you know, all the unseen aspects of Nitin Pai over
[Amit Varma]: there. But for now, let's take a quick commercial break. And when I come back, we'll come back
[Amit Varma]: without the hegemon. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of
[Amit Varma]: you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009
[Amit Varma]: and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I was
[Amit Varma]: shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about
[Amit Varma]: many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well, that phase in my life
[Amit Varma]: ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through a
[Amit Varma]: newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I
[Amit Varma]: will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover
[Amit Varma]: in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and
[Amit Varma]: subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your
[Amit Varma]: email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you. So welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with
[Amit Varma]: my good friend Pranay Koteswani. We are now freed from the hegemony of our good friend Nitin Bhai.
[Amit Varma]: And now we'll kind of continue talking about principles of foreign policy and you know,
[Amit Varma]: how we can look at them through the Russia-Ukraine conflict or rather through the Russian invasion
[Amit Varma]: of Ukraine. So Pranay, you know, we were chatting about economic sanctions before the break.
[Amit Varma]: Give me, you know, we speak about different kinds of leverage about different kinds of power.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when we talk of economic power per se, you know, what exactly do we mean by it? And what
[Amit Varma]: is it good for? Like, I've, you know, I think Nitin was the first person from whom I read the
[Amit Varma]: formulation to the effect of a rising GDP is the best foreign policy, right? Obviously referring to
[Amit Varma]: how economic growth increases your leverage in the world and economics therefore matters. So
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about this that you know, why does it matter beyond the obvious sense that
[Amit Varma]: hey, we are a bigger market for everyone and we have more goods and services to export and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. Beyond that sense, you know, why does it matter? What is it good for? How do we use it in
[Guest 2]: foreign policy? Yeah, right. So I guess like the one central lesson of one of the lessons of this
[Guest 2]: conflict is about how military power still matters, you know, so sharpening the military instrument,
[Guest 2]: regardless of your economic power is also important. Now, having said that, let's look at
[Guest 2]: economic power and military power. What is the difference? Why is it important, right?
[Guest 2]: So one thing is that in international relations, we always talk about the idea of fungibility of
[Guest 2]: power. So this is a concept by David Baldwin, the idea that, you know, you can convert one form of
[Guest 2]: power to the other, right? So the in that sense, economic power is important. So there was this
[Guest 2]: study by Paul Kennedy is a historian who looked at great powers over the last 300 400 years,
[Guest 2]: what was the relationship between economic might and military might. So he sort of concludes that
[Guest 2]: economic power produces military power, and military power is used to acquire or protect
[Guest 2]: that economic power, you know, so there is a sort of a spiral arrangement you can think of where
[Guest 2]: economic power helps you to produce military power, and then military power is used to acquire,
[Guest 2]: protect, so on and so forth, you keep gaining this over time, right? Now, there is there are
[Guest 2]: also bounds to this, if too much of economic power is diverted to the military, right up front, then,
[Guest 2]: you know, your economic might decreases, you don't produce enough productive resources
[Guest 2]: to be able to improve your might over time, right? And conversely, if there is a lot of
[Guest 2]: overstretch on the military side, then your economic power also declines, because you have
[Guest 2]: taken up challenges that you are not ready for, like it has happened with the case of Russia,
[Guest 2]: right? So now, there is a sort of a military stretch where you have applied military power
[Guest 2]: beyond your means. And now, the nation states which can respond are responding in the economic
[Guest 2]: domain, right? So one of the sort of corollaries of this fungibility of power is that a problem
[Guest 2]: in one domain can be addressed through the application of power in another domain, right?
[Guest 2]: And that's what you're seeing now that militarily, the West wouldn't want to provoke sort of a
[Guest 2]: nuclear risk, because they both are nuclear power. So there is a risk in going in that direction.
[Guest 2]: But economic sphere is where the West does have a lot of power, and it can apply it in direct means
[Guest 2]: in indirect means. So direct means would be like sanctions, right? There are export controls now
[Guest 2]: being thought of, even investment controls, investment barriers will be there. Then there
[Guest 2]: are also means through the international system, right? So WTO, what happens in the trade system
[Guest 2]: there? How is Russia treated, like you mentioned about SWIFT, etc, right? So there are global
[Guest 2]: economic systems where you can influence what Russia can do and what you cannot do, right?
[Guest 2]: So now, what you're seeing unfold is that the West applying power in a dimension they are
[Guest 2]: more comfortable with, and where Russia is weak, relatively weak. Military power in Ukraine was
[Guest 2]: its strength, so it could do a lot of things. But now you're seeing the US and the West get
[Guest 2]: together and apply pressure in that dimension, right? So that's how economic power operates.
[Guest 2]: Now, obviously, there are fallouts, there are negative consequences of each of these, right? So
[Guest 2]: military power, one sort of relative advantage is that it can pose an existential threat and can
[Guest 2]: influence decisions in a very quick time. And this is what General Menon always reminds us when he
[Guest 2]: teaches his sessions in defense and foreign affairs that, you know, military powers advantages that it
[Guest 2]: can pose an existential threat in a very limited timeframe. Whereas the effects of economic
[Guest 2]: sanctions or economic power are over time, one in building your own strength. And second,
[Guest 2]: if you want to directly use it in a conflict, you have to be immensely more powerful than your
[Guest 2]: adversary. Now, so that's where you saw in terms of economic power, right? So there are lots of
[Guest 2]: these measurements about how much bigger power you should be for sanctions to have a coercive
[Guest 2]: or a deterrent effect. And they are like you need to have an economy which is 100x,
[Guest 2]: some people argue in order to actually have the kind of deterrent effect that you want,
[Guest 2]: which was clearly not the case in this conflict, right? Russia is still a big power. So economic
[Guest 2]: sanctions in a sense didn't work as well as a deterrent. But what economic power can do in this
[Guest 2]: conflict is to reduce Russia's economic power over time. And then because of the economic power
[Guest 2]: reducing Russia's military power will also reduce over time, right? If you have very limited
[Guest 2]: resources, you're not able to buy the best kind of equipments, collaborate with the best kind of
[Guest 2]: researchers across the world, it will hurt your ability to produce weaponry to even what they
[Guest 2]: can't even sell to some of the buyers now, right? Because of these sanctions, there will be a
[Guest 2]: deterrent effect on that. So it will hurt their military power also over time, right? So the idea
[Guest 2]: is economic power can be used in this way, but its effect will not be as instantaneous as military
[Guest 2]: powers was and what you saw playing out, right? So this is one way of thinking. The next also like
[Guest 2]: this concept of power itself is very ambiguous. There are lots and lots of papers and careers made
[Guest 2]: on thinking about power in international relations. But one sort of measure that I like is
[Guest 2]: by this political scientist, Mike Beckley, who talks about power of countries should not be
[Guest 2]: thought of as you can accumulate it over time with no cost. So he thinks of power as a ledger.
[Guest 2]: No, there are costs ledger where you also have some costs that you have to incur and also benefits
[Guest 2]: that you incur. So if in that ledger formulation, power can be thought of as for example,
[Guest 2]: population, population is also on the positive side. And it also can be on the negative side
[Guest 2]: in the sense that you also have to provide for a larger amount of population etc. And
[Guest 2]: definitely it's on the positive side because after all people give a lot of benefit, right?
[Guest 2]: So if you look at that formulation, he thinks of power as you can predict outcomes of a lot
[Guest 2]: of great power rivalries if you think of power as GDP multiplied by GDP per capita. So this is
[Guest 2]: a rough again a model but which says that if a country's power is determined by this formulation,
[Guest 2]: then you are able to predict even the outcomes of great power rivalries well and it has he does
[Guest 2]: this over last five or six rivalries over 200-300 years in order to get this. Now this is an
[Guest 2]: interesting formulation because GDP represents sort of the benefit side, right? The more the
[Guest 2]: bigger the country will have the bigger the GDP, whereas GDP per capita also takes into account
[Guest 2]: the costs of providing for a larger population, whether you are able to have enough growth so
[Guest 2]: that you are able to also increase the productivity of every individual, right? So that so if you look
[Guest 2]: at this formulation, it is interesting, right? GDP, India's GDP is big, but when you do GDP
[Guest 2]: into GDP per capita, we might be in the middle income range, right? So that sort of is a good
[Guest 2]: formulation to think of power in international relations and it takes into account economic
[Amit Varma]: power and its impact on military power as well. So one of the points you made was that you know
[Amit Varma]: that when we talk about the fungibility of power like this that a problem in one domain can be
[Amit Varma]: addressed in another. Now it just strikes me that if I'm Putin and I'm sitting there and I
[Amit Varma]: see your economic power and I see what the sanctions will do and it will lead to a vicious
[Amit Varma]: circle where I'll get economically affected and therefore I'll get militarily affected because
[Amit Varma]: you know I have less to invest in building up my arms and so on and it's a it's a spiral to
[Amit Varma]: the bottom and I can't win. So why would he not then bring his nuclear put his nuclear weapons
[Amit Varma]: back on the table and say that fine you know since it's you know shift the focus from one domain to
[Amit Varma]: other and say that fine economic sanctions fine I'm crazy you know play the good game theorist
[Amit Varma]: would call the game of chicken and you know whether or not he is actually rational but
[Amit Varma]: it's rational for him to play that game and to give the impression that he can do anything and
[Amit Varma]: so if nuclear weapons come on the table then doesn't that kind of balance the whole economic
[Amit Varma]: power equation I mean the the you mentioned General Menon I recorded that excellent episode
[Amit Varma]: where he gave me so much insight on India going nuclear and all of that and one of the things that
[Amit Varma]: India going nuclear obviously did was that it actually brought India on par with Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: or rather brought Pakistan on par with India because they both got nuclear weapons and
[Amit Varma]: therefore any engagement they have has to be a super superbly limited engagement because
[Amit Varma]: neither side can afford an escalation and while we in terms of conventional army at that time we
[Amit Varma]: would have had a massive superiority suddenly we were equal because both sides have a nuclear
[Amit Varma]: weapon so similarly I would imagine that putting the nuclear option on the table would be one way
[Amit Varma]: for Putin to reduce the asymmetry otherwise yeah so absolutely like nuclear powers addition of
[Guest 2]: nuclear weapons sort of gives you an offset right you can suddenly bridge some of the gaps
[Guest 2]: that you could but put Putin has already brought nuclear weapons to the table right he's already
[Guest 2]: mentioned that if any country were to intervene they will have consequences which you have never
[Guest 2]: heard of and things like that so that thing has already passed after that is where these economic
[Guest 2]: sanctions have been improved and of course he can say what he wants to say but the consequences of
[Guest 2]: nuclear escalation will be felt by him by Russia at large as well right so it's not as if you can
[Guest 2]: the bluster is fine but for for you to act you know that there is the consequences only one
[Guest 2]: and that's annihilation so how long can you play that game of chicken right that is one before that
[Guest 2]: I would say that actually what Putin did because of this economic sanctions and knowing that
[Guest 2]: economic power is the western is that they tried to isolate themselves gain more economic power
[Guest 2]: over the last four five years right so if you read many articles on this there were this idea of
[Guest 2]: building their foreign exchange reserves also this idea of they knew that they are connected
[Guest 2]: with Europe because of the gas connection energy so there are only certain things that the west
[Guest 2]: can do without incurring costs on their own citizens so that calculation was also there
[Guest 2]: because the sanctions game is actually quite old so he tried to make sure that generally they are
[Guest 2]: shielded from the effects of another sanction of the kind that had happened earlier I guess
[Guest 2]: the difference this time is that the current sanctions are like unprecedented in scope
[Guest 2]: earlier you had sanctions from US etc but US and Russia don't trade much anyways but this time
[Guest 2]: because of how abhorrent this invasion is being seen there are not just sanctions there are
[Guest 2]: secondary sanctions and you know sanctions of the kind that if you are a supplier to Russian
[Guest 2]: military or say Russian strategic establishment and you just buy some equipment from the US
[Guest 2]: these sanctions also apply to you you know so that's like the kind of sanctions which we generally
[Guest 2]: don't see and which are very difficult to enforce actually but this is what has been attempted and
[Guest 2]: there is a lot of overwhelming support from a lot of countries on this which makes it difficult for
[Guest 2]: Russia to sort of sidestep this you know so there is real cost like you were saying on Russian
[Guest 2]: citizens also because of this even though the sanctions are tried they have tried to craft it
[Guest 2]: in a way that they don't affect the common person but I think the effect will still be felt by a lot
[Guest 2]: of people so essentially if you are buying anything which is to do with Russian military if you are a
[Guest 2]: company which deals with the Russian military in any way or say data centers that are owned by the
[Guest 2]: Russian government you sort of come into the ambit of this sanction if you are buying something which
[Guest 2]: is significantly American which is pretty much everything a lot of things will be American so
[Guest 2]: that's why these economic sanctions have are a new thing in that sense you know they are
[Guest 2]: unprecedented in scope and let's see how that plays out so I don't think it will sort of
[Guest 2]: necessarily lead to toppling of the regime or etc but there's genuinely a pressure which it
[Guest 2]: puts and probably reduces economic power over time even if this war ends in two three days
[Guest 2]: the sanctions are not very easily they won't go away very easily there will be this
[Guest 2]: impact of reducing economic power and reducing military power over time.
[Amit Varma]: So you know you referred to Putin's nuclear rhetoric as bluster and you said how long can
[Amit Varma]: he play the game of chicken and you were laughing and part of the sort of implication of that was
[Amit Varma]: in the end we are all rational people the cost is too much but could it be the case that foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy may sort of foreign policy perhaps doesn't adequately take into account the fact that humans
[Amit Varma]: can be irrational frail even insane I mean if you kind of look back into the 1930s and you talk
[Amit Varma]: about Hitler for example you know you may not take into account how far he will go because a lot of
[Amit Varma]: it is irrational you know if at some point people were to hear about plans of the holocaust they
[Amit Varma]: would surely discount it they would say it is not rational for anybody to do something so monstrous
[Amit Varma]: but the point is he went out and did it and the thing is foreign policy can largely treat people
[Amit Varma]: as rational actors but you only need to be wrong once you know for the kind of annihilation that
[Amit Varma]: you're speaking of especially in this case especially if Putin sees that so many stars
[Amit Varma]: who would never have spoken out against the regime the chess players sportsmen the prominent people
[Amit Varma]: in civil society who had otherwise stayed shut are suddenly speaking up against it if he feels
[Amit Varma]: his position is personally threatened you know and we already we've spoken about his visions of
[Amit Varma]: glory whether he's Peter the Great or Catherine the Great or you know whoever then it becomes
[Amit Varma]: dangerous why you know because it's a very low probability event that he would do something
[Amit Varma]: incredibly irrational that sparks of a chain of events that leads to catastrophe but that
[Amit Varma]: possibility is surely non-zero and the cost is too high so how does one take that into account
[Amit Varma]: and if it is rational for us to take that into account then is it not rational for him to continue
[Amit Varma]: playing that game of chicken because at some point someone's got to back down and we know that we'll
[Guest 2]: have to back down sooner or later yeah no i agree there is definitely a non-zero chance and of an
[Guest 2]: event which has you know catastrophic impact and that's why the idea about you know nuclear
[Guest 2]: de-escalation etc is about that that you reduce these chances and i'm sure you have spoken about
[Guest 2]: this with gentlemen and so not going into those details but yeah so foreign policy that's why i
[Guest 2]: think history is not that great a guide for some of these things you know there might be such events
[Guest 2]: which completely change what foreign policy or your model for explaining international relations
[Guest 2]: could be there is and you have to also think of this that foreign policy is the way we study it
[Guest 2]: it's a small n study right n being the number there are not very many experiments you can run
[Guest 2]: there are not many very events that happen so you it is all it is tentative to the extent that you
[Guest 2]: know right now and it can change so that risk definitely exists but the way people try to then
[Guest 2]: study is to think of models from outside foreign policy and you know think of you know what can
[Guest 2]: public choice theory tell you or what can public policy tell you about how this will act or what
[Guest 2]: is the relationship between the oligarchs and the organizations within russia who i'm sure also
[Guest 2]: don't want nuclear war right so there are it's not just putin being equal to russia right in fact
[Guest 2]: even for this invasion i'm sure there were a lot of other people on board as well we generally tend
[Guest 2]: to see in the simplest model we see one person or one rational actor called the state which is not
[Guest 2]: right there are bureaucratic actors everywhere there are also political actors who are acting
[Guest 2]: in different direction and finally the policy that you have is a resultant of a lot of things
[Guest 2]: that are being acted so that so it applies in russia's case as well it's not just putin there
[Guest 2]: will be various other actors inside which you can apply pressure on which you think they will act in
[Guest 2]: a direction which will push putin to act in a particular way as well right so the that is what
[Guest 2]: detailed analysis of people who would know russia would be thinking of right now it's not the
[Guest 2]: centrality of putin only but who are the other actors there will at some point of time there
[Guest 2]: will be a cost benefit calculation which will come into play with or without putin right so that's
[Amit Varma]: what they are trying to influence at this point yeah i mean the way you mentioned public choice
[Amit Varma]: theory public policy i think from all of those all of those depend on assumptions of how people
[Amit Varma]: tend to behave which are correct for example public choice theory would say people tend to
[Amit Varma]: respond to incentives which is obviously correct but they don't always and there are outliers now
[Amit Varma]: the point is that when you speak of public policy in general you know if there are outliers the
[Amit Varma]: outliers are on the margins they don't really matter they get smoothed out soon enough but in
[Amit Varma]: a case like this an outlier is basically i mean not the whole world going up in smoke i don't want
[Amit Varma]: to kind of exaggerate but you know the consequences are immense but i i kind of get that so let's kind
[Amit Varma]: of talk about you know how conflicts like this in modern times are necessarily different from
[Amit Varma]: conflicts in earlier times i mean this is a conflict in the information age you know a trade
[Amit Varma]: war is also as you have said by default a technology war and you know nathan speaks about
[Amit Varma]: the concept of an authoritarian disadvantage in the information age so can you elaborate a bit on
[Amit Varma]: how in modern times with the internet in the information age you know how should we look
[Amit Varma]: at such conflicts differently and what are the different kind of dynamics that come into play
[Guest 2]: here yeah so this is going to be a long answer but we can discuss some parts of it so first let's
[Guest 2]: take this idea about war in the information age and how trade wars generally are now becoming
[Guest 2]: also tech wars so we saw that in the case of china and us where it was not just financial
[Guest 2]: restrictions investment restrictions but also active restrictions to prevent nation-state from
[Guest 2]: getting ahead on the technology front right so you have restrictions on china's semiconductor
[Guest 2]: industry or huawei or 5g companies etc so why is that so right so one way to think of it is now
[Guest 2]: the role of if you think of national power as being composed of economic elements technology
[Guest 2]: elements military elements whatever i think the role of technology in this overall bucket of
[Guest 2]: national power is oh is emphasized a lot more now like a lot of nation-states believe that
[Guest 2]: technology could be a way for you to garner more power on all other fronts so the idea then becomes
[Guest 2]: that how do you prevent other nation-states from getting that technology or you prevent or you how
[Guest 2]: do you beat them before they get it right so that's the dynamic which is playing out a lot more
[Guest 2]: on the technology front earlier everything is being seen in this strategic quote-unquote terms
[Guest 2]: right everyone a lot of technologies whether it is ai semiconductors quantum technology etc so on
[Guest 2]: this there is another interesting framework that i came across that how can technology impact
[Guest 2]: national power if you have to think of it so there is this paper by center for security and emerging
[Guest 2]: technology georgetown where they talk about three ways and i quite like them one is innovations can
[Guest 2]: introduce new elements of power which didn't exist right so for example you have one dutch company
[Guest 2]: which produces the kind of machines that go into making really cutting-edge semiconductor chips
[Guest 2]: okay it's called asml now just because you have that kind of capability the dutch national power
[Guest 2]: increases in the sense that now us wants to influence netherlands so that they don't give
[Guest 2]: this technology to china or chinese companies right so they it was not a element of power which
[Guest 2]: netherlands would have had if this kind of innovation was not done out of that right so
[Guest 2]: this is one way the second way is innovations can change the importance of existing elements of
[Guest 2]: power right so even if you are militarily superior but suppose there you have the technology to blind
[Guest 2]: the enemy satellites for example then the effectiveness of the military instrument
[Guest 2]: decreases right so probably you can't use your ballistic missiles etc because you have
[Guest 2]: the technology to blind satellites right so this is the second way the third one which is
[Guest 2]: interesting is innovations can alter intermediate goals that states pursue now for example there is
[Guest 2]: with the current technology you have social control temptations information warfare is easier so china
[Guest 2]: can do a lot of things it can pursue a goal of totalitarian control which it couldn't without
[Guest 2]: some of these technologies right so if this is these are the three ways you can think of how
[Guest 2]: technology impacts national power and we are seeing some of these play out now right so
[Guest 2]: so now let's come to the the current conflict in this conflict also you see this entire dimension
[Guest 2]: of tech war also right so it's not just where us is saying that we will apply the traditional
[Guest 2]: sanctions which were on financial institutions central bank etc but also the fact that if
[Guest 2]: the russia was purchasing anything with respect to semiconductors with respect to some of these
[Guest 2]: cutting edge technologies there are sanctions on that as well you know so in a sense that what
[Guest 2]: us was us did to huawei a company huawei and zt a couple of years ago that has become a template
[Guest 2]: and they are now applying it to an entire nation state which is russia you know so this is sort of
[Guest 2]: the first time that you know such extensive export controls are being applied on a whole nation state
[Guest 2]: you know not just a few companies so that has impact right again that over time if we believe
[Guest 2]: this idea that technology is a substantial part of national power going ahead it will have an
[Guest 2]: impact on russia in the sense that it will slow down some of these connections also we need to
[Guest 2]: remember a lot of technology the areas that we are talking about now are not national industries
[Guest 2]: in the old sense where you could do everything locally you know like steel you could do
[Guest 2]: everything you could have you could build a steel industry locally but can you for example do a lot
[Guest 2]: of ai research or a lot of semiconductor development in-house just self-sufficiently
[Guest 2]: it's not possible in the current sense because a lot of these industries are globally distributed
[Guest 2]: you need to collaborate with other countries like for example a nice stat i heard was a lot of i
[Guest 2]: think around 50 percent or so of cutting edge ai research and ai papers happens by people who are
[Guest 2]: immigrants in another country so this was also some stats it is even in the us if you are you're
[Guest 2]: not born in that country so a lot of it is based on ideas a movement of ideas people also on good
[Guest 2]: services etc so now russia the only alternative russia has in on the tech front is then to do a
[Guest 2]: lot of these things locally or do things with china etc but this entire idea of collaboration
[Guest 2]: being mutually beneficial that gets cut off because of some of these trade tech sanctions
[Guest 2]: which get applied right so that's an interesting angle to look at something similar is also being
[Guest 2]: tried with the u.s china war you know that is also happening a lot of these tech sanctions
[Guest 2]: are being applied to them as well so it has tangible effects because of current technology
[Guest 2]: industry which is not national industries but global supply chains and if you interfere with
[Guest 2]: a nation state's ability to participate in this global supply chain they have only one option to
[Guest 2]: do some things locally which they can catch up over time but it delays it to certain extent right
[Guest 2]: because they are you can't do those things as you could do earlier through collaboration so you will
[Guest 2]: have to build strength they can probably catch up but it will take time and you have sort of bought
[Guest 2]: yourself more time on this technology front so that's what i would say on this trade was becoming
[Guest 2]: tech wars right and you will see it with time that anything related to tech will be used
[Guest 2]: in subsequent conflicts more so than in the past right so that is one new thing that has
[Guest 2]: happened. Yeah so now the other question that you brought up was about authoritarian disadvantage
[Guest 2]: in the information age now this is also an interesting this is Nitin's concept and we've
[Guest 2]: co-authored a paper on this recently but currently what is the thinking about the information if you
[Guest 2]: look at this war also Amit you would have observed that Russia's propaganda is missing from a lot of
[Guest 2]: our discourse right there's a lot of great things that Ukraine has done and how Ukraine has stood
[Guest 2]: against an imperial sort of superpower and hegemon but not we don't see anything from the Russian
[Guest 2]: side right that is quite curious because Russians are thought to be this you know masters of
[Guest 2]: information warfare they have cracked this from a long time so why is it the case that we don't see
[Guest 2]: a lot of Russian propaganda right that is also an interesting case study that we can probably learn
[Guest 2]: from the ongoing conflict now one thing is again generally if you think again let's go to the basic
[Guest 2]: of power right what is power and essentially power is A can exercise power over B in sort of three
[Guest 2]: ways you know first is the direct use of force or the direct threat of use of force by direct or
[Guest 2]: indirect means to get B to comply you know so for example when there is a cyber attack disabling
[Guest 2]: other state's critical infrastructure you would say or a threat of it you would say that A has
[Guest 2]: exercised power over B and that's why you have to do now the second one is A can exercise power over
[Guest 2]: B at the decision making level you know by changing its desires choice perceptions payoff
[Guest 2]: calculations etc you know so psychological warfare when we say by state A it is trying to intervene
[Guest 2]: at how the state B thinks of state A so for example if you have convinced Indians that
[Guest 2]: China is militarily so powerful that you can't do anything with respect to it it's a psychological
[Guest 2]: warfare right without even having fought the war you have changed their desires and calculations
[Guest 2]: third you know A can exercise power over B by changing its preferences morality and understanding
[Guest 2]: of reality itself you know so successful interference by state A in a democratic
[Guest 2]: elections of state B for example is an example there right so what Russia was able to achieve
[Guest 2]: with respect to US in 2016 elections was there right now the entire idea of democracy and what
[Guest 2]: democracy is is whether it is even genuinely democracy those questions were thrown up right so
[Guest 2]: it is sort of changing reality etc itself now these are the three kinds of ways in which A
[Guest 2]: can exercise power over B right now over the last 15-20 years in this information age a lot of focus
[Guest 2]: was on the first way of exercising power so a lot of ideas on cyber attack and what can be done
[Guest 2]: etc but now over the last 4-5 years a lot of thought has been gone into A that it's not so
[Guest 2]: much about in attacking some physical infrastructure but it is about influencing minds desires the way
[Guest 2]: nation states think of themselves right and you discussed this I think with Shivam in that episode
[Guest 2]: on their book as well but this is what we are talking about information control etc and what
[Guest 2]: can be that influence now let's come to the Russian angle here right overwhelmingly over the
[Guest 2]: last few years the thought was that because an authoritarian regime can control information
[Guest 2]: locally and whereas a lot of this information the way people think is disseminated decentralized
[Guest 2]: in democracies authoritarian regimes actually have an advantage that was the common narrative
[Guest 2]: right so they can influence elections in US what will you do right that kind of narrative was there
[Guest 2]: but now if you see in the there is a flip side to it as well right that a lot if you are focusing a
[Guest 2]: lot on your domestic narrative shaping that it doesn't come at zero cost right an authoritarian
[Guest 2]: regime has to spend a humongous amount of resources in trying to shape domestic narratives
[Guest 2]: right so that's what China does that's what Russia has been doing I mean there are estimates
[Guest 2]: that the great firewall in China employs more than around 100,000 people to sort of Chinese
[Guest 2]: censors right to see and shape a lot of this thing so that opportunity cost comes into being
[Guest 2]: in the kind of conflict situation right so Russia is so much now has to invest their resources in
[Guest 2]: trying to shape their domestic narrative that you know this is the right war we are going and
[Guest 2]: trying to do things that are desirable etc that they have ceded that space to Ukraine and the
[Guest 2]: West on the international front right so there in internationally there's just one narrative
[Guest 2]: which is about how Ukraine is standing up to it and despite all their supposed power in the
[Guest 2]: information domain you actually see Russia being behind in this particular game so this is one
[Guest 2]: more interesting lesson that we can think of from this idea right again there is another angle to
[Guest 2]: this so this is again a paper where they try to study what is the impact of authoritarians on
[Guest 2]: information warfare so this paper talks about this idea of the authoritarian information paradox
[Guest 2]: and they say the same thing that the absence of trusted sources of information for debunking
[Guest 2]: propaganda outside the state apparatus makes authoritarian regimes susceptible to target
[Guest 2]: information operations and that's what you are seeing now as well that there is a lot of
[Guest 2]: information a lot of things that are coming out from Ukraine are not necessarily the truth as well
[Guest 2]: there is information warfare from the other end as well but there is just this idea that because
[Guest 2]: you have a very small state apparatus which is focusing on certain things you can have other
[Guest 2]: ways of attacking which the state apparatus wouldn't have so you can think of it as the
[Guest 2]: application of the use of knowledge in society in the information warfare sphere right so you can
[Guest 2]: because there is decentralized power on the other end you can formulate new ways of attack new
[Guest 2]: dimensions where you can attack on the other side whereas the state apparatus on Russia is thinking
[Guest 2]: in one way and only in one direction and primarily now focused on their local information control and
[Guest 2]: management and hence ceding space to the other side which can come at it from various angles and
[Guest 2]: that's why we were thinking of this as an information as a sort of an authoritarian
[Guest 2]: disadvantage and this we'd written before this conflict and you were probably seeing that play
[Guest 2]: out in the sense that there is Russian propaganda which is missing out and ceding space to the other
[Amit Varma]: actors yeah the moment you mentioned Hayek and spoke about his great essay the use of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: in society i sort of got your point immediately because i till that point i was kind of struggling
[Amit Varma]: where i thought that okay you know the amount of money an authoritarian leader would spend on tech
[Amit Varma]: is you know not that much comparatively compared to how much you would spend buying missiles and
[Amit Varma]: all that so what is the problem you can kind of keep the propaganda going internationally
[Amit Varma]: but the key realization there is that authoritarians tend to think in top-down ways
[Amit Varma]: and you cannot sort of centrally plan things like narrative strategies you can do it up to
[Amit Varma]: a certain limit but otherwise you know if dissenters are decentralized and widespread you
[Amit Varma]: will have just a greater variety of strategies and tactics being thrown at the wall and the best of
[Amit Varma]: them will invariably be way better than the authoritarian in question and therefore will
[Amit Varma]: succeed by the way for my listeners i'll inform them that pranay of course as all of you would
[Amit Varma]: know that's this incredible hindi podcast which he co-hosts with our friend saurabh chandra
[Amit Varma]: called puliyabazi and i spoke for an hour there on hayek in hindi so that is one of the you know
[Amit Varma]: signal achievements of my life though i i have no idea what hindi speakers would have thought of it
[Amit Varma]: or what hayek lovers would have thought of it you know my next question goes to something that you
[Amit Varma]: said that you know there's something that tin likes to say that why do you need to hack evms
[Amit Varma]: when you can hack minds and that to me is really powerful and now one of the things that we have
[Amit Varma]: kind of realized over the last 10-15 years is how frail humans are in the sense of being in control
[Amit Varma]: of their thoughts and their actions this is something that i got a sense of in my gambling
[Amit Varma]: years i mean i was a i was on a gambler i was a professional poker player for five years and i
[Amit Varma]: did spend a lot of time in casinos and i read up a fair bit on you know the tactics that casinos
[Amit Varma]: use to keep gamblers gambling mind manipulation in a sense like the first time i went to this
[Amit Varma]: offshore casino in goa then called casino royale back in circa 2009-2008 i realized that these
[Amit Varma]: casinos have no windows nothing you have no sense of daylight coming in so you don't know what the
[Amit Varma]: time is they have no clock clocks they pump in oxygenated air through the ship so you stay
[Amit Varma]: energetic much longer so your sense of time passing is you know reduced you know i remember starting
[Amit Varma]: a game at two o'clock and after some time thinking and i look at my this thing at my
[Amit Varma]: uh time on my mobile and it's like eight o'clock you know so time passes really fast the idea is
[Amit Varma]: to keep gamblers gambling as much as possible and even in terms of how in the 80s and 90s slot
[Amit Varma]: machines were designed where you know one the music and the sound effects and the lights and
[Amit Varma]: all were meant to keep you almost in a state of trance where you're just playing playing playing
[Amit Varma]: but as much as that you know ai came in in the late 90s an early application of ai where you'd
[Amit Varma]: kind of analyze from what was happening on a player's screen that what is the point at which
[Amit Varma]: he is likely to stop playing and just five minutes before that somebody from the casino would come
[Amit Varma]: and they would tap the gambler on the shoulder and say sir you've been playing for so long we'd
[Amit Varma]: like to offer you a free drink and so on and so forth and you end up playing more right so i'll
[Amit Varma]: there's a great book on it which i'll link from the show notes i've forgotten the name but it was
[Amit Varma]: it had many tils for me and what we see in the modern age is that social media is doing this
[Amit Varma]: kind of constantly on a constant basis like in all kinds of little ways the idea is to keep
[Amit Varma]: us addicted to keep us scrolling to just keep us in there looking for the next dopamine hit
[Amit Varma]: you know jonathan hate points to the facebook like button and the twitter retweet has been
[Amit Varma]: particularly toxic because it incentivized a kind of performative behavior because that is the only
[Amit Varma]: way that you could actually get more likes more retweets more dopamine right and you know another
[Amit Varma]: example is many apps earlier you're in an app you press the back button you go out of the app
[Amit Varma]: but now many apps have been redesigned so you press the back button and the page refreshes
[Amit Varma]: and you can't help but see what new thing has come up there so you're kind of trapped into that and
[Amit Varma]: this strikes me as therefore something that you know makes it possible for a savvy state to not
[Amit Varma]: just take control of its own citizens if it masters this but also of that of you know other countries
[Amit Varma]: in informational warfare like this like the allegations against how russia interfered in
[Amit Varma]: the 2016 elections for example but it does this then become a necessary part of the and a more
[Amit Varma]: important part than one would otherwise think you know otherwise one would think okay this is a
[Amit Varma]: sideways thing it's like soft power you think about it a little bit but no need to spend too
[Amit Varma]: many resources on it but now it would strike me that you know any sensible authoritarian you know
[Amit Varma]: while you may be limited by your top-down thinking and obviously your dissenters being decentralized
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth radically network societies as you guys put it and we have an episode on that
[Amit Varma]: also would eventually have an upper hand because of hiking reasons but you know if you can adequately
[Amit Varma]: master these tools then you can go a long way and china particularly comes to mind because
[Amit Varma]: china is advanced enough in technology to do this and plus they have their own ecosystem which is
[Amit Varma]: cut off from the rest of the world in a sense and that's one of the things you predicted that
[Amit Varma]: you could have parallel internets existing across the world how does this then affect
[Guest 2]: the future of international relations and public policy i absolutely agree with you amit just like
[Guest 2]: we were thinking talking about nuclear weapons giving you a sudden offset and with respect to
[Guest 2]: other forms of conventional accumulation of power right where you get an economic power
[Guest 2]: gradually you also build it into military power again it helps you to build economic power so
[Guest 2]: in a way nuclear powers help you offset that suddenly similarly in the information is getting
[Guest 2]: control of this information warfare can sort of you know offset some of the other dimensions of
[Guest 2]: power where you might not be great at you know so that's why it's an attractive thing where a lot of
[Guest 2]: authoritarians would want to have this control and we are seeing that play out in many places
[Guest 2]: right so that i completely agree that that is one domain that you would want the other angle to this
[Guest 2]: was uh and we were talking there's a this great book by the way called the revolt of the public
[Guest 2]: by martin gurry i don't know if you've read it it's it talks about this idea about how there is
[Guest 2]: no monopoly over the information sphere now right so because there's no monopoly over the
[Guest 2]: information sphere a lot of failure sets the agenda in terms of especially in free societies
[Guest 2]: right because you can actually appoint the failures and a lot of these extremes make a lot of news
[Guest 2]: so what is his thesis was that the west's failure sets the agenda on a lot of things that get
[Guest 2]: discussed so and the regime sort of accumulates pain points whether it is police brutality economic
[Guest 2]: mismanagement foreign policy failures or boss responses to disasters these are his words so
[Guest 2]: these sort of things these failures can no longer be concealed they can't be explained away easily
[Guest 2]: so in fact if you are on the other side you can sort of amplify these kinds of failures try to
[Guest 2]: keep pumping this kind of narrative that you know your system is flawed see the kind of failures
[Guest 2]: that are happening etc and that sort of leads to this idea that you know you constantly think of
[Guest 2]: whether you are on the failing side on the wrong side you are actually influencing the way we think
[Guest 2]: that's why i started right in the beginning talking about narratives and the importance of
[Guest 2]: narratives right so no monopoly over on the information sphere can play out in this way i
[Guest 2]: don't know if recently the economist also has this great article on how social media is turbocharging
[Guest 2]: the export of america's political culture and a lot of that gets discussed right we are always
[Guest 2]: discussing american politics in india for because of these radically network societies and the idea
[Guest 2]: is because a lot of the discussions there are about failure about how democracy is flawed how
[Guest 2]: democracy has not been able to achieve what it wants to actually if you are on the other side
[Guest 2]: like russia and china you can probably use that as a weapon to constantly amplify that kind of a
[Guest 2]: narrative instead of talking about success instead of talking all about all the things that steven
[Guest 2]: pinker keeps telling us about right so that is something that can be weaponized and is being
[Guest 2]: weaponized uh so uh yeah radically network societies have their advantages and also some
[Guest 2]: of the fallouts that can come because of these this kind of information warfare angle to it
[Amit Varma]: so you know so here's a question now that russia's done what it's done and your overwhelming sense is
[Amit Varma]: that it's not going to work out for russia in the long run uh you know whether it's a negative
[Amit Varma]: some game and all of us suffer and all of that is a different matter but how does it affect the dynamic
[Amit Varma]: in times to come with china being a player in this picture because you know you would then naturally
[Amit Varma]: expect russia and china to become even firmer allies after this with you know helping each
[Amit Varma]: other in whatever different ways they can and china would be really good at some of this
[Amit Varma]: information warfare stuff i am guessing on some margins good on some margins not so good like in
[Amit Varma]: terms of advanced tech and ai and all is going to be very good on some margins like maybe ossified
[Amit Varma]: ways of thinking at this and not the kind of distributed decentralized way of innovative
[Amit Varma]: dissenters it would be a little behind but what is then in in the medium to long term the scenario
[Amit Varma]: that you see playing out like is there going to be this new sort of big walls equilibrium which you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about earlier or is there a sort of you know what what are kind of the dangers that lie ahead
[Amit Varma]: and where do you sort of see this going because my sense is that in a sense you know and i could
[Amit Varma]: be wrong and correct me but my sense is that the u.s could do nothing here that you know that so
[Amit Varma]: far what you see from the early response it feels a bit ineffectual you know that it has also been
[Amit Varma]: forced to take a step back that it has also perhaps lost credibility as a hegemon as it were
[Guest 2]: yeah so let's talk about the russia china angle see one thing that we can sort of infer from this
[Guest 2]: conflict is because of the response of other states and what it does to the russian economy
[Guest 2]: russia becomes in the long and medium term a smaller power than it currently is right because
[Guest 2]: of all these pressures that are being applied i mean it can't even export its equipment even if
[Guest 2]: this war continues for longer maybe there will also be restrictions on their oil in the and
[Guest 2]: energy industry right so that is a real consequence to russia now what that what then it does is
[Guest 2]: though russia becomes a smaller economy then it has no other option but to collaborate more with
[Guest 2]: the only other power which will be sort of look the other way which is china right so also we
[Guest 2]: should remember russia and china also have deep long-term divergence of interest right and that's
[Guest 2]: why the sino-soviet split also happened way back and even now there are genuine things like what
[Guest 2]: has to be done in central asia etc these are areas of contestations they have also had a border
[Guest 2]: conflict etc so those are for now suppressed because russia has no other options right and
[Guest 2]: china also needs russia in the sense because of the arctic the arctic opening a huge amount of
[Guest 2]: mineral resources you etc which china gets access to because of its relationship with russia so what
[Guest 2]: i see it is russia becomes probably a smaller power than it currently is and hence it aligning more
[Guest 2]: with china rather than sort of breaking out on its own and trying to do things on its own because of
[Guest 2]: the restricted options so in that way a sort of that new cold war trend that we were thinking
[Guest 2]: gets accelerated right so russia has to take help of china in and china would also want to extract
[Guest 2]: more out of this bargain because of russia's lesser options now and on the other hand because
[Guest 2]: russia is now so central to this entire conversation europe on the other hand sort of
[Guest 2]: becomes more allied with the us right because of centrality of europe and the questions of ukraine
[Guest 2]: etc so that way you are seeing more polarization of power happening over the long and medium term
[Guest 2]: so yeah many people say that probably over time russia and china will split because they have
[Guest 2]: inherent divergences on these issues but i sort of agree with the view that that's not happening
[Guest 2]: anytime soon it's more likely that russia and china will collaborate on a lot of things
[Guest 2]: and tilting towards more of what china wants than what russia wants because of how things are
[Amit Varma]: stacked up current and what also strikes me is that china must be sitting and looking at this
[Amit Varma]: current crisis with a little bit of a giggle and you know kind of enjoying the show because
[Amit Varma]: in a sense the rest of the world has proved a little more ineffectual than you would have
[Amit Varma]: imagined and that therefore means that you know it's got to be thinking that tomorrow if we march
[Amit Varma]: into arunachal you know the international community is going to make noises but there's
[Amit Varma]: not really much they can do i mean there's certainly nothing india can do you know our
[Amit Varma]: leverage it feels to me and tell me if i'm wrong our leverage is extremely limited in terms of in
[Amit Varma]: military terms is really nothing we can do in economic terms is nothing we can do uh you know
[Amit Varma]: the last time something happened we banned tiktok so you know and so what's the deal there how is
[Amit Varma]: uh you know marching into arunachal or whatever parts of it they want and some of which they've
[Amit Varma]: already done as a dress rehearsal for eventually doing something similar in taiwan are all of those
[Amit Varma]: possibilities more on the table than before because you know the the west kind of ukraine ukraine yeah
[Guest 2]: so i actually don't agree at all there is because the essential difference is india is a nuclear
[Guest 2]: power right so uh and if you see what china has been able to do is it's a lot of this salami
[Guest 2]: slicing take a part of a land where it is contested where there are also no people no indians right
[Guest 2]: like that is so those those are the areas which china can do and indian government is still trying
[Guest 2]: to find a way out of that but arunachal is where you know we are indians live there if there is
[Guest 2]: this uh idea that uh i mean the again the same thing applies you know you are actually attacking
[Guest 2]: a nuclear power in a way that nuclear then there is an option for them to respond uh as they desire
[Guest 2]: so i i don't think even china would want that uh it's too higher cost to pay for them as well you
[Guest 2]: know barring if there is complete craziness which happens uh so in and if you see what china has
[Guest 2]: done over the last few years is again this uh accurately as you said they know that to an extent
[Guest 2]: they can push things and no other countries will respond so that's why you see a lot of this
[Guest 2]: uh you know take this ridge here in the south china sea or take a bit of land there that is
[Guest 2]: the extent to which china can go against india and india can retaliate also a lot of indian
[Guest 2]: responses are also on the table it's not just that the border is completely blocked and india can't
[Guest 2]: do the same thing to china you know those options are also open and in the indian military i'm sure
[Guest 2]: has many of these plans to do a quid pro quo wherever china does things on its side and at the
[Guest 2]: border india has enough capability to increase presence for let's say one two years to match
[Guest 2]: the force you know so that i i think it's a different thing russia ukraine is not comparable
[Guest 2]: to india china at all especially on arunachal and things questions of that sort so that is
[Guest 2]: different now let's go to the taiwan question yes on taiwan there is also a lot of now commentaries
[Guest 2]: etc thinking that does this make uh something like taiwan china occupying taiwan more likely
[Guest 2]: etc but also we should remember the us's security commitments on taiwan question are a lot lot more
[Guest 2]: and it matters a lot lot more to it than what has happened in ukraine right that again ukraine was a
[Guest 2]: it was a question debated from a long time a country which came into being into 1991 etc there
[Guest 2]: were a lot of but taiwan question is a slightly different one i think us also has it's a lot more
[Guest 2]: to lose if that were to happen right i mean in many angles you can think of taiwan being the
[Guest 2]: center of semiconductors also this idea of this entire indo-pacific construct that us has been
[Guest 2]: talking about us's close relationships with japan south korea and taiwan itself their military bases
[Guest 2]: there a lot of things get questioned if they were to allow china to walk in right so that's why they
[Guest 2]: have a lot more to lose a lot more focus on that question than it was on the ukraine thing so
[Guest 2]: yeah maybe china in fact i would say because russia has now given a template of what can happen
[Guest 2]: it be that it becomes that much more unlikely because a lot of nation states now know what
[Guest 2]: kind of thing can play out and there are already conversations on how taiwan can be helped so that
[Guest 2]: such a thing doesn't get repeated you know so that also sort of becomes more unlikely a lot of
[Amit Varma]: nation states are thinking of that already so yeah so firstly thanks for disagreeing because i feel
[Amit Varma]: relieved no one will mess with arunachal so that's good to know but again perhaps a noob question on
[Amit Varma]: the china taiwan thing that if china does decide that fine we're going to go in you know what does
[Amit Varma]: the u.s specifically do because over here they really couldn't do much obviously it's completely
[Amit Varma]: different taiwan is way more central to the world economy and way more important to the u.s and say
[Amit Varma]: ukraine is so in terms of interest way greater but what do they do in practical terms you know
[Amit Varma]: if they find out like they found out the date when russia is planning to get it to ukraine
[Amit Varma]: say they find out a date when china is planning to get into taiwan what do you do what leverage
[Guest 2]: do you have what's the game yeah so if one is like you know there is also this a lot of
[Guest 2]: conversation in the u.s military circles of how can you deter china now that's the idea right you
[Guest 2]: eventually don't want to reach that situation itself so there is a lot of things and what
[Guest 2]: would go in this deterrence package so a lot of things people are talking about that you know if
[Guest 2]: you were to come into taiwan we'll destroy the semiconductor industry itself all those of
[Guest 2]: fast fantasies of military planners are there but this idea is that can there are ways to deter
[Guest 2]: china right now make it very costly for them if they were to do something in taiwan you know and
[Guest 2]: there are these options you know whether on the military front or the technology front such that
[Guest 2]: even if they were to get control of taiwan they will not get the returns of that sort of act so
[Guest 2]: that's what is being shaped a lot in and if you look at this taiwan and a lot of those countries
[Guest 2]: are also talking about say nuclear submarines etc themselves right so a lot of the conversations
[Guest 2]: which were off the table earlier so for example japan has been with a pacifist constitution from
[Guest 2]: a long time but recently the former p.m shinzo abe also talked about that you know can we now
[Guest 2]: change our stance can there be a nuclear powered submarines etc in that area right so now the
[Guest 2]: stakes are being there's an attempt to raise china raise the stakes of any such sort of invasion you
[Guest 2]: know so the idea is to say that if you were to do this there will also be a nuclear consequence
[Guest 2]: there will be a lot to pay for so don't do it right so that's what any country can do beyond
[Guest 2]: that there is nothing else you can do you raise the costs for such an attack and those conversations
[Guest 2]: are already happening on nuclear powered submarines in the in east asia increasing
[Guest 2]: some of those there so that that that is the stance that us and others are taking but can
[Amit Varma]: you give concrete examples of what are the ways to deter china for example so you can talk about
[Amit Varma]: hey that you know you can talk about sanctions you can talk about you know how you won't get
[Amit Varma]: the benefits if you kind of invade them you can talk about the possibility of nuclear submarines
[Amit Varma]: in the future but apart from that what are the concrete ways in which china can be sort of
[Guest 2]: deterred which are credible for china isn't this credible enough that you if you were to attack
[Guest 2]: taiwan you will have a nuclear consequence you will have things to pay for i think that itself
[Guest 2]: is a big credible threat why would you want to do that right so i think these all these are
[Amit Varma]: all credible threats i i don't know i mean let's say that they say this and let's say china walks
[Amit Varma]: into taiwan tomorrow tomorrow is the us actually going to use nuclear weapons yeah us probably
[Guest 2]: won't but there are others in that region that's why i read the ideas can you arm the other states
[Guest 2]: as well with this that's the conversation which is going up right so the so the unpredictability
[Amit Varma]: for the chinese kind of goes up yeah that's one way so tell me now about india's perspective
[Amit Varma]: in all of this like how do we sort of look at uh russia and uh you mentioned earlier that there
[Amit Varma]: are three ways in which we see relations with russia and which which might determine the what
[Amit Varma]: we choose to do what we should do so on and so forth so can you elaborate upon that yeah so this
[Guest 2]: is a the interesting question right so uh again i had written this hum up kind of a question right
[Guest 2]: so that's the who what are we of russia so the three kinds of arguments that i have uh heard
[Guest 2]: right so one argument is the strategic autonomy argument which we discussed earlier the fact that
[Guest 2]: you aligning or you acting in favor of russia in on any of these questions is itself a sign
[Guest 2]: of strategic autonomy that's one way of thinking right so and that has a strong resonance with a
[Guest 2]: lot of people in delhi still right so and we discussed why this is sort of probably problematic
[Guest 2]: because strategic autonomy itself is a function of power right so that's what one thing we discuss
[Guest 2]: the second way to think of it is in anthropomorphic terms right that russia helped us in 1971 war
[Guest 2]: russia has been a reliable partner so how can we ditch them at this point of time right again
[Guest 2]: doesn't make sense because international relations are not your familial relations or relations
[Guest 2]: between human beings interests are more important than your friends or there are no friends there
[Guest 2]: are no enemies right interests are what they are so in that sense again this doesn't make sense
[Guest 2]: and also there is one long-standing narrative that russia has been a reliable and super reliable
[Guest 2]: partner so again i was thinking of what does super reliability mean you know in real terms
[Guest 2]: so super reliability in my definition would be when a state a is doing something for state b
[Guest 2]: even though it is not in interest of state a right so you are like sacrificing something in
[Guest 2]: especially for a state that is what a thinking of a lot of people in india is with respect to russia
[Guest 2]: because they helped in the 1971 war etc right so again help itself is not a right term because
[Guest 2]: as nithin was mentioning we had actually signed we had allied with them effectively three months
[Guest 2]: before the war so what they were doing was effectively in their interest to stop us
[Guest 2]: from doing what us could right so they were at best we had common interest with them and they
[Guest 2]: were acting on those grounds right so i don't agree with them being like a super reliable partner etc
[Guest 2]: okay so that is the second way of thinking the third way of thinking about the india russia
[Guest 2]: relationship is just in terms of very realistic terms the fact that india and russia have very
[Guest 2]: close defense relationship you know and that i think i find some sympathy with that yes that
[Guest 2]: argument makes sense that some estimates suggest that you know 50 60 percent of our defense
[Guest 2]: equipments come from russia not just small equipments but also russia has partnered with
[Guest 2]: india on things which others haven't till now right so nuclear submarines are thought
[Guest 2]: are talked about the brahmos missile is talked about now these were things that were not possible
[Guest 2]: or other countries were not willing to trade with india for a long time right especially
[Guest 2]: uh because of the cold war and etc and the fact that india had allied off with soviet union after
[Guest 2]: 1971 effectively so those were things which were not possible then so so i i agree with this
[Guest 2]: argument that we probably need uh russia in the short run because of this partnership but i would
[Guest 2]: say that and a lot of other people have also said that this idea of you being 60 percent dependent
[Guest 2]: on one state is absolutely strategic folly and strategic foolishness and a lot of government
[Guest 2]: policy now has been to move away from that you know so over the last few years if you see
[Guest 2]: there is one at least develop the partnership with russia so that you have other leverage points
[Guest 2]: not just them giving you weapons right and the other is that you also buy from
[Guest 2]: from others who are partners who have you with whom you have much much broader interests right
[Guest 2]: so like us france etc others so that is already shaping up and i think that would then allow us
[Guest 2]: to have more options the other thing which i would change is that a lot of people like they say that
[Guest 2]: russia gave us the equipments that other countries didn't but that is not something which can't be
[Guest 2]: changed now right so if you see the geopolitics has significantly changed now with china being
[Guest 2]: the primary threat actually us has a chance to tell india that we can give you the weapons that
[Guest 2]: others couldn't and we ourselves didn't at that point of time but we can change their opinion so
[Guest 2]: for example you have already seen this happening with respect to the aukus deal where australia
[Guest 2]: uk and us have agreed to transfer nuclear powered submarines to australia which was something like
[Guest 2]: this was off the table even three four years ago right but that has happened now because of the
[Guest 2]: change geopolitical circumstances so i think now there is a chance for the us to make that you know
[Guest 2]: if you if they want india on their side and india can also make this offer that
[Guest 2]: let's deepen the military partnership to areas which were forbidden earlier because of the
[Guest 2]: change geopolitical realities and that will help us also reduce our dependence on russia
[Guest 2]: and in many ways so i think that's one another way to think of it so out of these three ways
[Guest 2]: i have some sympathy with the third way of thinking which is a more realistic way the
[Guest 2]: other two are just ideological but uh and also i think the more realist way of doing that would
[Guest 2]: be reduced dependence and form a new sort of relationship on the military terms with the west
[Guest 2]: and it is possible now yeah i mean that's a fantastic point about the win-win game between
[Amit Varma]: us and india if we kind of change that balance and our dependence on russian weapons otherwise
[Amit Varma]: is something like europe's dependence on their pipelines for example uh you know instead of
[Amit Varma]: opening up their options with lng and so on and we've mentioned 71 of a few times i have a couple
[Amit Varma]: of great episodes on that period of time one with both are with srinath raghavan one is on
[Amit Varma]: the u.s involvement in south asia through the decades which also covers that period which is
[Amit Varma]: fantastic and one on the bangladesh war itself which covers in great detail all the geopolitics
[Amit Varma]: of that period so i'll link those from the show notes now my other sort of question is about how
[Amit Varma]: much of foreign policy like we've spoken earlier about how the foreign policy establishment is
[Amit Varma]: something that's almost independent of politics or has been so far that there is a continuity
[Amit Varma]: that comes and that runs across different governments and different parties and so on
[Amit Varma]: but what is the possibility of future foreign policy being affected i won't say dictated but
[Amit Varma]: being affected by domestic considerations and domestic politics so on the one hand there would
[Amit Varma]: be domestic political compulsions that you always have to take a nationalistic line and show yourself
[Amit Varma]: as a strong guy out there and you know the kind of rhetoric that was floating around against china
[Amit Varma]: for example a couple of years back when tiktok was banned would again you know and you could
[Amit Varma]: enter a vicious circle kind of situation there purely at a rhetorical level and the other angle
[Amit Varma]: would be things like social media and civil society pressure which you know where there
[Amit Varma]: will be pressure to do posturing and take this stand or take that stand morals principles all
[Amit Varma]: of that nonsense ignoring you know the hard reality of what interests on the ground are
[Amit Varma]: now typically a rational foreign policy establishment would not take that so seriously
[Amit Varma]: but politically it might become difficult so you know how big a danger is that of our
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy being led astray by domestic politics and are there sort of examples from
[Amit Varma]: other countries in the world where this has actually happened and things have gone bad
[Guest 2]: yeah so I yeah like we were discussing earlier domestic policy making does have an impact on
[Guest 2]: foreign policy as well there will be so a lot of for example think Richard Hanania has this book on
[Guest 2]: public choice theory and the illusion of grand strategy recently but that book talks about how
[Guest 2]: the military industrial complex etc has had a lot of an overbearing effect on the US supposed grand
[Guest 2]: strategy decisions that we talk about right so we attribute it to grand strategy but if you think of
[Guest 2]: it it will it might be because of not just political interest domestic interest also
[Guest 2]: now it now there's this contested view right it's not something maybe we should take on face value
[Guest 2]: but it is one view so similarly there are other examples also that there will be impact of
[Guest 2]: domestic affairs on our international relations as well I think it is particularly so in the case
[Guest 2]: of Pakistan right because of this idea of the new idea that is being put out this idea of Hindu
[Guest 2]: India and Pakistan etc right so that is definitely the case but on the case of China which is what
[Guest 2]: the larger conversation now is I don't think there is so much divergence you know there is in fact a
[Guest 2]: lot of convergence across parties and if you see there is this the strongman idea and all are there
[Guest 2]: but I don't think for example the PM has even spoken about China and taken its name as of
[Guest 2]: with regards to the border conflict at least right so there is this idea that you're leaving space
[Guest 2]: for a negotiation to happen that I think is understood across party lines that probably
[Guest 2]: some form of resolution of the border dispute is on the interest so that space is still being
[Guest 2]: left right if you look at the rhetoric there is a lot of rhetoric on twitter but forget that if you
[Guest 2]: look at the government rhetoric it's not been that case where they have even said in fact if you see
[Guest 2]: recent arguments there many people have also said that the US wanted to take a much more anti-China
[Guest 2]: stance on some of the things that have happened but the Indian government said that back off I
[Guest 2]: think we will sort it out on our own we don't need so in fact that's the conversation currently you
[Guest 2]: know and that's why the people on the US side are thinking that are you going to be with us
[Guest 2]: also with against China or not you know so that that's the current level of conversation instead
[Guest 2]: of this idea that you know domestic interest will lead to some taking up arms against China on other
[Guest 2]: things so that is what I would say on the interplay of domestic interest domestic relationships and
[Guest 2]: international affairs yeah to the other thing there is some continuity in international relations but
[Guest 2]: like you also mentioned a lot of this a lot of this also has been a happenstance due to contingent
[Guest 2]: realities etc right like think of the 1966-67 devaluation where this there was this idea that
[Guest 2]: you know we'll do devaluation according to what also there was a overwhelming recommendation
[Guest 2]: probably we'll get closer to US but the relief that was supposed to come from the US side
[Guest 2]: didn't happen and then the domestic politics of Indira Gandhi trying to stand out against
[Guest 2]: other adversaries in congress took out and then she went into a totally different direction and
[Guest 2]: went socialist right so maybe if that if the attitude of US etc would have been different
[Guest 2]: we wouldn't have seen we would have probably seen devaluation probably would have seen
[Guest 2]: that economic growth and reform pathway happen much sooner rather than what it happened in 1991
[Guest 2]: eventually right so even those things could have happened so I would say largely India's
[Guest 2]: national foreign policy India's foreign policy has been realistic realist and I don't think
[Guest 2]: any other nation state would say it is not realist everyone acts according to their interest but the
[Guest 2]: inevitability in direction is not a given you know there could have been different paths taken
[Guest 2]: but we took that path because of one how we think of the world and also because of some
[Guest 2]: contingent realities which happened during that time excellent let's sort of also now at this
[Amit Varma]: point talk about unintended consequences of the of the conflict because the world is complex and
[Amit Varma]: things can always spiral out of control you know there is the oil situation you know and you simply
[Amit Varma]: don't know you know where this butterfly effect can really land up that oil prices go up and how
[Amit Varma]: it affects the domestic politics of different countries and how relations between them are
[Amit Varma]: reconfigured we simply don't know that and that's just one way and another unintended consequences
[Amit Varma]: of course is that hacking attempts over the last couple of weeks have gone down massively because
[Amit Varma]: Russians are busy doing other things and they've kind of been cut off so give me a opportunity
[Amit Varma]: cost yeah so give me a sense of sort of the possible unintended consequences both bad and
[Guest 2]: good that can come out of this if you might care to speculate yeah now this is a tough one yeah
[Guest 2]: one thing again because now the relationship for example between Russia and China becomes less of
[Guest 2]: partners and more of you know one being overwhelmingly more powerful than the other
[Guest 2]: so it might expose some weaknesses accelerate them which couldn't have been done earlier right so
[Guest 2]: for example China can get more aggressive with respect to Russia on some of the things because
[Guest 2]: they know that they are not the same power or they'll have consequences to bear now so those
[Guest 2]: kinds of things are one unintended consequence that might happen so that idea which people are
[Guest 2]: talking about about possibly a future Russia China split might get exit in one scenario right
[Guest 2]: tough to predict that is one the second one is yeah it's a wake-up call to a lot of countries
[Guest 2]: in Europe as well also that the idea that military power etc needs to be beefed up you can't depend
[Guest 2]: on the US itself for a lot of these security guarantees so you will see a lot of movement
[Guest 2]: on that front as well so that's possibly depends you want to see it as a positive on a negative
[Guest 2]: thing so there might be some sort of more focus on military power as such rather than other
[Guest 2]: instruments of power as well so that is another unintended consequence that's it I am not able
[Amit Varma]: to think of more right now but yeah I mean the future is unknown unknowns and all of that
[Amit Varma]: so so a final question before I will tell you I think I should end this episode relating the
[Amit Varma]: friend the story my good friend Narendra Chinoy told me about how Mr Madiyar and Mrs Madiyar met
[Amit Varma]: and fell in love but before that final kind of question on this that if you are to say look ahead
[Amit Varma]: 10 years and from you know and this is in a sense an extension of the question on unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequences but not quite but if you if you are to look ahead 10 years and just see the world order
[Amit Varma]: and how things are on the global stage what's kind of the worst case scenario and the best case
[Guest 2]: scenario yeah that's a good question see I think one the worst case scenario for India will be
[Guest 2]: where India itself is a reduced power right so and that's why I think a lot of this relationship
[Guest 2]: with the west etc also matters because it is central to our economic power right if we want to
[Guest 2]: gain more strength in many dimensions you have to collaborate with others we talked about
[Guest 2]: technology etc being global supply chains coming into play there so those things are really
[Guest 2]: important so the worst case scenario for me is forget about the world order it is in a world
[Guest 2]: where we think of autarky where we think we can do everything on our own we don't need us we don't
[Guest 2]: need china the best solution for all this is atma nirbharta if we go around that path I think that
[Guest 2]: is the worst case scenario and once our power reduces no one will want in you India to I mean
[Guest 2]: they won't India becomes a less important power at the international stage right you are just
[Guest 2]: one more country a lot of people I think think India is already there you know but I think it
[Guest 2]: is still touch and go you know over the last 10 years in fact in economic terms we haven't done
[Guest 2]: that well the if you look at the narratives in the 2006 to 10 it was about India China right
[Guest 2]: can India be a competitor to China now it's not even being talked and then next if we go down that
[Guest 2]: path probably we'll be again compared to Pakistan right so that's like the worst scenario that I
[Guest 2]: can think of so for me that's why I think this idea of atma nirbharta and all is good as a
[Guest 2]: narrative but it should mean to build strength I call it atma shakti is more important than atma
[Guest 2]: nirbharta right used to build strength not to become autarkic and try to become self-sufficient
[Guest 2]: in everything that's not possible in today's scenario so that I think is the worst possible
[Guest 2]: scenario for in my mind the best possible scenario and I'm thinking in the range of acceptable I
[Guest 2]: mean you can think of others I think one scenario which is which relates to the current conflict is
[Guest 2]: where India is actually able to maintain relationships with Russia US and China all
[Guest 2]: of them right so it's a power which all of them want on your side that's the possibly the best
[Guest 2]: scenario you could be in then you are you can have a military relationship with Russia you can have
[Guest 2]: economic relationships with the West and with China as well right so that is possibly the best
[Guest 2]: scenario over the 10-year period now if you want to talk about the next two three years I would say
[Guest 2]: with relating to this conflict India's scenarios depend on two variables and this is the analysis
[Guest 2]: we've done at Takshashila some of us that one variable is the state of Russia China ties
[Guest 2]: and the second is how much restraint US shows towards India's Russia ties right because they
[Guest 2]: are not going away anytime soon because of our military relations so the best case scenario is
[Guest 2]: where India where US is shows a lot of restraint consideration for India's relationship with Russia
[Guest 2]: and on the other hand Russia China ties sort of become start weakening right that way then
[Guest 2]: India is also is more confident of Russia supplying military weapons if it were to come
[Guest 2]: into conflict with China right if India China things escalate and if Russia is can be depended
[Guest 2]: on given that now it is for its military supplies then we are in a better scenario right so that is
[Guest 2]: possibly the best scenario we can be in the next two three years the worst possible case of course
[Guest 2]: is in the next two three years if Russia China ties are really strong which means then you can
[Guest 2]: forget about Russia being a reliable partner right because Russia is already dependent on China in
[Guest 2]: turn why would it help you or give you weapons when you are actually attacking its core ally
[Guest 2]: which is China right so we can forget about that that is the worst case and on the other variable
[Guest 2]: if US also takes a very stringent stance on India's relationship with Russia right so that
[Guest 2]: becomes the really tough situation for India to be so I guess the strategy would be to try to move
[Guest 2]: as far as possible to that quadrant where US understands India's equation with Russia and
[Guest 2]: also that Russia China relations probably are weakened over time probably through more interaction
[Guest 2]: with the west also emphasizing India's own growth and India's own economic power that's the best
[Amit Varma]: India can hope for well that's that old Chinese curse which goes may you live in interesting
[Amit Varma]: times and I think we do seem to be living in interesting times not sure if it's a curse or
[Amit Varma]: not but yeah let's see where it goes so I want to end with the story of how Mr. Madiyar met
[Amit Varma]: Mrs. Madiyar and you at the end of this is a challenge for you Pranay you got to give me a
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy lesson out of this right okay so I'm just making sure you pay attention during
[Amit Varma]: the story yeah so both the Madiyars by the way have passed away long ago they are you know they'd
[Amit Varma]: probably be in the 90s if they were alive so this is the story that Narendra Chinoy tells me
[Amit Varma]: that Mr. Madiyar while going to work goes to a particular bus stop every day the young Mr. Madiyar
[Amit Varma]: and catches a bus and all that and there one day there one day while he's waiting at the bus stop
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps the atmosphere is slightly overcast and you know a spell of rain in the air but not
[Amit Varma]: quite rain you know buses going by he's looking around casually suddenly he stops because he
[Amit Varma]: spots the future Mrs. Madiyar though it must be noted at this point that even if the impulse
[Amit Varma]: comes within him to recognize her as a future Mrs. Madiyar she is not yet Mrs. Madiyar he
[Amit Varma]: doesn't even know her name but he spots this lovely lady and you know stops breathing for
[Amit Varma]: a few moments remembers thankfully to breathe otherwise the story would not continue and is
[Amit Varma]: completely spellbound and then Mrs. Madiyar gets into a bus and she goes away and then Mr. Madiyar's
[Amit Varma]: bus comes a little later and he gets it gets into it and he goes away so the next day Mr. Madiyar
[Amit Varma]: goes again at the same time and you know and she's there again and she takes the same bus and she goes
[Amit Varma]: and he takes the same bus and he goes so when he's on that bus he misses his stop because his mind is
[Amit Varma]: somewhere else and it's you know he's on an entirely different journey and and human beings
[Amit Varma]: are good at patterns so the day after that he doesn't actually have to go to office that particular
[Amit Varma]: day but he goes out to the bus stop anyway and there she is and she gets into the bus and and
[Amit Varma]: he can't gather up the courage to go and talk to her I don't remember which year this was 1830s no
[Amit Varma]: probably a little later 1940s possible but it's a long long long long time ago so Mr. Mr. Madiyar
[Amit Varma]: doesn't gather up the courage to kind of go to her but of course he is very attracted and now he's
[Amit Varma]: you know earlier he was living in one world and now there is a parallel world and that parallel
[Amit Varma]: world has just her everything else seems the same but you know so one day one day this transformative
[Amit Varma]: moment happens in his life where you know he sees her gets into a bus and just as she gets in
[Amit Varma]: he realizes that she's dropped her pink raincoat she's left it behind at the bus stop and she's
[Amit Varma]: gotten into the bus so he grabs his moment Mr. Madiyar jumps up and you got to realize that
[Amit Varma]: before this that Mr. Madiyar is a scholarly kind of nerdy geeky person not much given to physical
[Amit Varma]: exercise and so on but now he jumps up and he jumps and he picks up this raincoat and he starts
[Amit Varma]: running after the bus and the bus picks up speed and Mr. Madiyar picks up speed and the bus goes
[Amit Varma]: faster and Mr. Madiyar goes faster and then somehow Mr. Madiyar catches up with the bus he jumps into
[Amit Varma]: the bus swinging in holding you know one of those handles or whatever they have on the side of the
[Amit Varma]: bus and there she is and he drops the raincoat at her foot and immediately he jumps back out
[Amit Varma]: because he's got to go back and catch his bus after all one has to be practical but he's done
[Amit Varma]: the job and he somehow manages to get back to the raincoat and he realizes that there is this
[Amit Varma]: policeman waiting for him looking incredibly angry because you see there was a case of mistaken
[Amit Varma]: identity here that raincoat was not the future Mrs. Madiyar's raincoat it was this policeman's
[Amit Varma]: raincoat and so the policeman hauls Mr. Madiyar off to jail and that is where Mr. Shenoy ended
[Amit Varma]: his story and I said that bro can you kindly tell me how Mr. Madiyar and Mrs. Madiyar then
[Amit Varma]: eventually spoke after this and Shenoy said that no no I didn't ask that I was so charmed by the
[Amit Varma]: story but the way Mr. Madiyar got into the story is that he said that that is the day I decided I
[Amit Varma]: would marry her because after all I went to jail for her so it's a beautiful story any foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy lessons you like from the earlier Mr. and Mrs. Madiyar story we got the Russia Ukraine story
[Guest 2]: so what what can you derive from this yeah I mean miscalculations can have strange consequences
[Guest 2]: that is one thing you can think of and yeah I think I'll I'll really like that quote by
[Guest 2]: Will and Ariel Durant in their book that states have our instincts without our restraints so yeah
[Guest 2]: so some of these things that's why we try to anthropomorphize sometimes some things look like
[Guest 2]: they are human relations in the state context international context but yeah the states don't
[Guest 2]: have our restraints so states can do what they want and this is in fact if you think about the
[Amit Varma]: older Mr. Madiyar he has restraint he's sending his wife out to fight the intruder but the younger
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Madiyar you know has instincts but no restraints and that's a great thing and that
[Amit Varma]: in a sense it's a kind of a metaphor for youth itself so Pranay on this profound note I mean
[Amit Varma]: thank you for this profound note and thank you for giving me so much of your time and
[Amit Varma]: so many of your insights thank you Amit if you enjoyed listening to this episode and want to
[Amit Varma]: of the scene in the unseen at scene unseen.in thank you for listening and hey listen do not
[Amit Varma]: invade anyone this week not this week thank you did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the
[Amit Varma]: unseen if so would you like to support the production of the show you can go over to
[Amit Varma]: scene unseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive
[Amit Varma]: and kicking thank you